Ant-Man film review : Marvel’s lastest isn’t small enough
Paul Rudd is such a witty, skilled actor that if any star could take a superhero origin story and breathe some brash new life into it, you’d think it would be him. But in Ant-Man, a big-screen Marvel behemoth that’s as slapped together as it is expensive, Rudd doesn’t just get small. He gets tamed and diluted– spiritually reduced. It’s hard to say if the film neuters his personality or if Rudd got there first.
He plays Scott Lang, an idealistic cat burglar who becomes the unwitting guinea pig in an experiment to create the ultimate secret weapon: a stealth superhero the size of an insect. Lang, in his own mind, was meant for bigger things. But after spending three years in San Quentin prison for blowing the whistle on a corporation, he discovers that his life is a wreck. He loses joint custody of his daughter, and the only place that will hire him is Baskin Robbins. That’s when he’s recruited to put on an experimental suit that reduces anyone who wears it to the size of an ant. Supposedly, he gets stronger as well, though we don’t see much evidence of that; it would have been nice if he’d lifted at least one sugar cube 50 times his weight. Rudd, in his first fantasy blockbuster, is like an obedient soldier going through a drill. There’s one funny bit where he says, “I ruined the moment, didn’t I?”, but it’s just about the only moment when the film’s facetiousness seems less than laboured.
The actor who injects a bit of pizzazz into Ant-Man is Michael Douglas. He plays Lang’s crusty mentor, Dr Hank Pym, a fallen scientist who has seen his research into how to shrink the distance between atoms stolen right out from under him. Pym has reason to be cranky, but Douglas invests even the most neutral lines with an anger more bristly than his goatee. He acts like he’s still in The China Syndrome – in other words, as if something is truly at stake. Yet his stern performance is also a winning piece of kitsch, because Douglas seems to be the only person on screen who didn’t get the memo: that there’s nothing at stake in Ant-Man beyond a franchise marketing plan aimed squarely at 10-year-olds. The film isn’t terrible, but it makes earlier Marvel outings like the first Spider-Man or Iron Man look like masterpieces. There’s hardly a trope in it you haven’t seen before, and done with far greater flair.