    Tickets for the discount bus company Megabus start at $1, plus some pesky
fees. Its routes connect dozens of United States cities from Maine to California
(along with more in Canada). Many routes run overnight, meaning you can save on
lodging, if you’re up for brushing your teeth at highway rest stops.
    So, is Megabus the cheapest way to see America? Couldn’t you ramble through
more than half the country for a month, hitting, say, 10 cities for less than $25?
    After a weeklong, six-leg trial (five of the legs with Megabus), my conclusion
is: sort of. You’ll rarely get that $1 fare; capturing those prizes, which are released
irregularly, requires constant social-media monitoring. The seats, pleasant enough for
a four-hour trip from New York to Washington, are extremely difficult places to sleep.
Most inconveniently, the routes often don’t connect in the way you want them to, forcing
often absurdly lengthy connections.
    To be fair, Megabus was not set up for meandering road trips anymore than the Staten
Island Ferry was meant as the no-frills pleasure cruise it has become for many. Its main
task is to get people from Point A to Point B, cheaply and with no extras (except for
semifunctioning Wi-Fi).
    But with a few adjustments and concessions, it can work. Most important, use the
long layovers to your advantage.
    My plan was to go from New York to Silver Spring, Md. (via Peter Pan, not Megabus,
which does not stop in Silver Spring), and crash my nephews’ swim practice with a takeout
Vietnamese dinner. A few hours later, I’d catch the Metro to Union Station in Washington
for Megabus’s overnight bus to Knoxville, Tenn., known for its music, spending a day and
evening there. Then I’d catch a 1:30 a.m. bus to Lexington, Ky., arriving at 5 a.m., to
start a four-day bike trip. The way back worked out with shorter stops and just one overnight.
    Sound torturous? Perhaps. I’m not saying it was paradise on wheels. But the total cost,
including the Peter Pan leg, was just $63 (and could have been less if I hadn’t had to
postpone the trip once and reschedule on short notice). By comparison, round-trip flights
from New York to Lexington when I booked were edging toward $400.
    The first leg to Silver Spring was a breeze; at $18 it was the most expensive leg,
but worth it — dropping me off, by the way, about two minutes from the tasty and affordable
Lotus Cafe. Later that evening, after pho and spring rolls and some horsing around in the pool,
I hopped on the Metro to Union Station for the bus to Knoxville.
    No one is expecting an overnight bus ride to be pleasant, but in the last five years
of writing Frugal Traveler, I have often been surprised by almost decadently luxurious
overnight buses, with plush seats that recline fairly close to horizontal.