The film's title is a hopeful manifesto, a wish of the heart stated as a law of physics. "Love is a stream-it's continuous," the unhappily divorced Sarah Lawson (Gena Rowlands) tells her uncomprehending psychiatrist early on in John Cassavetes's last masterpiece, Love Streams (1984). Later, in one of several fruitless phone calls to her ex-husband, Jack (Seymour Cassel), Sarah poses this conviction as a dare: "Do you believe that love is a continuous stream?" Jack ignores her question, but his words and actions have made clear that love often does the opposite of stream-it stops. Cassavetes would direct one more film before his death in 1989-the comedy Big Trouble (1986), which he took over after production was under way and subsequently disowned-but Love Streams is universally considered his valediction, a final reckoning with the subject that for him loomed larger than all others. "I have a one-track mind," Cassavetes says in the documentary "I'm Almost Not Crazy . . . ," shot on the set of Love Streams. "That's all I'm interested in, is love." Philosophy, from the Greek philosophia, literally means love of wisdom or knowledge; Cassavetes, in that same interview, inverts the etymology, defining it as the "study of love." "To have a philosophy," he declares, "is to know how to love and to know where to put it."
Love Streams finds a perspective on its volatile characters that approaches serenity. So many of Cassavetes's other films are domestic disaster movies; the mood in Love Streams is postapocalyptic. His earlier work zeroed in on the crisis points in human relationships. The characters in Love Streams have lived through their share of crises and will likely live through more. The open ending bears out Sarah's philosophy. As Robert exits the frame, the song on the jukebox goes: "I didn't know what to do / So I'll leave it up to you"-a fitting farewell from a romantic who knew that on the subject of love there are no last words.
The film was released on 8/24/1984 and won the Golden Bear Award in the same year.
