Facebook Stock Primed to Jump on Earnings Report.
Facebook is attracting aggressive upside call buying in anticipation a solid earnings report will soon send the stock sharply higher.
With the stock around $96, investors are trading options in anticipation Facebook’s (ticker: FB ) stock surges after next Wednesday’s second-quarter earnings report. Facebook is expected to report earnings of 47 cents a share on revenue of about $4 billion.
Investors are focusing on Facebook’s July $100 call that expires July 31. It is a near pure-play on earnings. The call expires two days after the report. Investors are paying $3.20 to buy the call. Open interest is about 40,000 contracts.
The call’s price indicates investors believe earnings results will push the stock above $103.20, which would represent a significant new high. On Tuesday, Facebook closed at a 52-week high of $97.58. If the stock were to hit $110, the call would be worth $10.
The Facebook earnings trade was easier to initiate before Apple’s earnings report was released late Tuesday. Apple’s mixed sales outlook sent the stock sharply lower, clouding the enthusiasm many investors felt for big technology stocks after Google ( GOOGL ) stock surged on earnings.
Mixed financial results from Intel ( INTC ) and Microsoft ( MSFT ) have also weighed on investors.
“Sentiment matters, and quantifying that ahead of time is how to navigate earnings, full stop,” Michael Block of Rhino Trading Partners explained to clients in a morning note.
Still, Facebook has significant supporters, suggesting the stock could prove to be a glorious exception to the angst now besetting investors.
Bank of America Merrill Lynch just added Facebook to its list of top stock ideas. Analysts Justin Post and Joyce Tran set a $105 price target and made the case that Facebook’s new advertising formats, including video opportunities, should prove profitable. Facebook’s Instagram unit will open to advertisers in the fall. Incredibly, Facebook accounts for 20% of all the time people using mobile devices spend on the Internet – and that time-share statistic is growing.
Against this enthusiastic endorsement, other analysts are debating if Facebook can trade over $100. This lack of consensus is probably creating a healthy counterbalance to the options market’s enthusiasm.
The debate among analysts – all of whom largely look at the same financial models – suggests enough restraint and enthusiasm exists among stock investors to propel Facebook higher on a good earnings report. If analysts were universally in agreement on Facebook’s earnings, the stock would lack the proverbial wall of worry stocks need to sustain advances.
On June 10, the stock was at $80. The strong move since then makes it difficult to determine if there is enough skepticism to sustain Facebook’s massive rally, or if investors might be prompted to sell on good news and lock in profits.
Goldman Sachs is telling clients that Facebook’s options prices suggest the stock will make an 8% earnings-day move, double the median move over the past eight quarters.
Should Facebook’s earnings propel the stock higher, the move could prove parabolic. Investors could yank money from wounded technology darlings to buy a piece of an ascending social media star that offers a play on the future of mobile advertising.