Criminals could target banks if chip-and-pin reduces hacking opportunities, MasterCard says.
The transition away from magnetic stripe credit cards in the U.S. to more secure chip-and-pin cards could lead to more bank breaches as criminals look for alternate ways to make money, a MasterCard executive said Friday.
Retailers and banks are being held to a deadline of October to roll out chip-enabled cards and payment terminals, after which point liability for fraudulent transactions will shift over to whichever party has the lesser technology. Chip-and-pin cards store data on a chip, rather than the card’s magnetic stripe, and are far more difficult to counterfeit.
Because the U.S. is the last developed country to adopt the technology, it is home to about half the world’s card fraud. After that door for fraud closes, criminals are expected to hunt for alternate avenues.
“That’s my fear: that criminals are going to try to find other ways to get their money. Breaches of financial institutions is one of them,” Johan Gerber, senior vice president of processing products at MasterCard, said. “We definitely see a steady increase, a couple of them every year, and that is concerning.”
The chip-and-pin technology is also called EMV, short for Europay, MasterCard and Visa, which developed it about two decades ago. About 60%-70% of payment terminals in the U.S. are capable of handling EMV transactions, says Carolyn Balfany, who leads U.S. product delivery at MasterCard.
While many terminals might be equipped hardware-wise to handle EMV, only about 26% of merchants are projected to turn that functionality on by the end of the year, because of obstacles like training staff, according to the Mercator Group, a Maynard, Mass.-based research firm. Balfany expects that about 65%-70% of credit cards in the U.S. market will be chip-and-pin cards by the end of the year.
The new cards, while harder to duplicate, won’t put a stopgap on all credit card fraud. They don’t offer extra defenses against fraudulent online purchases, which are expected to grow as EMV becomes more popular.
And U.S. banks are only going halfway with the chip-and-pin technology. Most banks continue to ask customers who pay with the new cards to scrawl signatures on receipts instead of inserting the card into a reader and then entering a four-digit personal identification number as a second layer of security, even though signatures are useless.
Gerber says MasterCard is working with banks to continually improve security and spot anomalies big and small — both when criminals attempt to remove millions of dollars from an account, and when “all of a sudden, I see 2,000 cards transacting in a space where I’ve never seen them before for small accounts.”
MasterCard is exploring new ways to authenticate online transactions to confirm that the person typing in the credit card number is actually the cardholder as part of its effort to combat fraud. Among the options: Asking users to take selfies. Wearing a bracelet that knows your heartbeat. Having your phone and your credit card communicate.
“There’s not going to be a single silver bullet,” Gerber says. “Criminals are going to try to find other ways to get their money.”