Cloud formation, convective activity, and large and small-scale flows including everything from turbulence at a spatial scale of a few meters, to large atmospheric fluctuations on the order of a thousand kilometers occur in the atmosphere included in the atmospheric boundary layer. Sunlight provides the energy source causing these, but much of this passes through the transparent atmospheric layer and gets absorbed once by the earth's surface (land and sea). The earth's surface then emits energy into the atmosphere in the form of sensible heat (direct heating), latent heat (heat associated with the evaporation and condensation of water vapor), and long-wave radiation (infrared rays). The sun's energy is passed into the atmosphere this way, but the first area to receive this energy is the layer closest to the earth's surface: the atmospheric boundary layer. Also, anthropogenic emission of Co2 occurs first in this atmospheric boundary layer. In this way, the atmospheric boundary layer plays an important role in acting as a pipeline between earth's surface and the atmosphere as a whole. 
The atmospheric boundary layer is also an area where we carry out our lives. The heat, cold, humidity, asthma, and allergies we experience due to air pollution, the dispersal of pollen, and so forth, are all due to atmospheric boundary layer conditions. 
Given the situation, it is important to understand the state of the atmospheric boundary layer and its spatio-temporal changes, but in reality this is not a simple task. This is because the atmospheric boundary layer, as the name states, forms the "boundary" between the atmosphere and earth's surface and is hence influenced from both sides. Influence from the earth's surface is particularly important for the following: the large diurnal temperature differences between day and night; differences between land and ocean; and difference in energy emission due to different land cover such as desert, vegetation, snow and ice, urban areas, and farmland, strongly influencing the condition of atmospheric boundary layer. Therefore, it is necessary to continue researches not limited to physics of atmosphere, but in wide range of academic fields including physiology and ecology of plant, snow and ice properties, and soil hydrology.

NOTED: the 19th Symposium on Boundary Layers and Turbulence, sponsored by the American Meteorological Society and organized by the AMS Committee on Boundary Layers and Turbulence will be held on 6/2/2010, in Keystone, Colorado.