Many people in today’s world experience a number of discomforts in relation to spending too much time in front of a computer. These discomforts are especially common for students at Iowa State University because computer technology is used for most of the classes taught here. Many students are unaware of the damage that they are doing to themselves by staring at computer screens for extended periods of time. 

This paper will describe some of the effects that these students may experience which include: dry, burning eyes; blurred vision; delayed focusing; altered color perception; headaches; tired eyes; eyestrain; sore eyes; red eyes; contact lens discomfort; glare sensitivity; excessive tearing; neck, shoulder and back pain (intersights). Collectively, these symptoms have been termed Computer Vision Syndrome (CVS) by the American Optometry Association (eye2eye). 

The purpose of this paper is to make students aware of some of the effects of long hours spent in front of a computer, and what they can do to prevent these effects. This paper will cover the causes of common effects of Computer Vision Syndrome in detail so that students are aware of the causes as well as the effects of extended amounts of computer usage. When the students know that their computer is the source of the discomforts described below, they will be able to easily prevent these discomforts. Ultimately, this paper will help students become much more efficient in their computer work when they know what causes the effects of Computer Vision Syndrome are and how they can prevent them. 

What Are the Causes of Computer Vision Syndrome (CVS)? 

When a person is looking at a computer screen, that person is processing information at a very rapid rate. The human eye is designed to see clearly at distances of three to twenty feet away without any accommodations, and at this range our eyes traditionally experience no discomfort. When the average person is looking at a computer screen, that screen is usually around twenty inches away from the eyes. The eyes must continually expand and contract to continually refocus to compensate for this small distance. The eye is just not designed to be able to handle staying contracted for any amount of time, and the result is tired, dry, and very sore eyes (eye2eye). 

The images and text on a computer screen are composed of pixels. Pixels are tiny dots that are bright in the center and fuzzy on the edges and are usually accompanied by backgrounds that do not lend a strong contrast to the written text. Text on a piece of paper usually has a clear, well-defined edge and a sharp contrast to its background which doesn’t result in nearly as much eye strain. The eye’s focusing abilities are better suited to that of crisp text than fuzzy pixels. When looking at a computer screen, our eyes "drift to a resting point rather than remaining focused on pixels" (intersights). The constant process of drifting and refocusing leaves eyes strained and fatigued (intersights). 

What Are the Symptoms of Computer Vision Syndrome (CVS)? 

Following are some common symptoms that people suffering from of Computer Vision Syndrome (CVS) experience and how to prevent them. 

Headaches 

Squinting is the natural reaction of the eyes to the glare of the computer screen from fluorescent lights, direct sunlight from a window, or even from too much contrast between the displayed text on a screen and its background (intersights). Squinting is a primary cause of headaches, but headaches and pain in the forehead can also be attributed to the annoyance of looking at fuzzy-edged pixels on a computer screen. 

The problem with staring at fuzzy pixels can be solved by purchasing a pair of glasses specifically designed to help your eyes focus on the unevenness of the pixels. These glasses can also be tinted to reduce the glare of the computer screen (eye2eye). Computer screen covers can also be purchased to reduce the glare of the screen. 

Neck Pain 

Neck pain can be caused in two ways. Eye glasses only use a small part of their lenses for the focusing of intermediate ranges. The neck and shoulders constantly move in an effort to view the screen clearly through this tiny part of the lenses, so the glasses that the person is wearing are the main contributors of the problem. If the person is not wearing eye glasses, then the pain is usually from the neck trying to compensate for the eye muscles being fatigued (intersights). 

The neck will become sore when it’s trying to compensate for tired eyes. Simply taking short breaks from the computer screen when the eyes begin to feel tired can this (intersights). If the person experiencing the neck pain is wearing multi-focal lens glasses, then merely useing a pair of single-vision glasses when working at a computer should get rid of the pain (intersights). 

Burning Eyes 

The longer a person looks at a computer screen, the more tired their eyes become, and the less that person blinks. Blinking is essential to maintaining a layer of water over the eyes. When blinking slows down, the eyes become drier which leads to the burning sensation (intersights). 

Keeping the eyes from becoming tired will keep them from becoming dry. Preventing eye fatigue is done by simply taking short breaks from the computer screen when the eyes begin to feel tired. This will keep the eyes blinking at a normal rate and the layer of water on them will be maintained. 

Double Vision 

Eye muscles cramp up because people tend to stare at the computer screen as a result of fuzzy-edged pixels. When the muscles that control your eyes cramp up, double or blurred vision occurs. When a person looks up from their computer, their cramped eye muscles will cause blurred or double vision (intersights). 

Glasses that are designed to prevent squinting at pixels may. Whenever the eyes get tired, a break of a few minutes from the computer screen is usually enough to get rid of the symptoms (eye2eye).
