LONDON — The European Union launched an antitrust investigation into six major U.S. film studios and British satellite broadcaster Sky UK on Thursday, for allegedly restricting viewers on mainland Europe from watching pay TV services available in the United Kingdom and Ireland.
In a statement, the European Commission named the movie studios as Disney, NBCUniversal, Paramount Pictures, Sony, Twentieth Century Fox and Warner Bros.
It said without the restrictions, Sky would be able to decide whether to sell its pay-TV services to prospective viewers on mainland Europe.
"European consumers want to watch the pay-TV channels of their choice regardless of where they live or travel in the EU," said Margrethe Vestager, EU commissioner for competition. "Our investigation shows that they cannot do this today."
If the allegations are confirmed, each firm would have breached European competition rules prohibiting anti-competitive agreements, the Commission said.
The Commission launched an investigation into the seven companies in January 2014 and found clauses that require Sky UK to block access to films through its online pay-TV services — so-called "geo-blocking" — or through its satellite pay-TV services to consumers outside the U.K. and Ireland.
It said some contracts also required studios to ensure that broadcasters other than Sky UK cannot make their pay-TV services available in the U.K. and Ireland.
The Commission is also examining licensing agreements between the studios and France's Canal Plus, Sky Italia, Sky Deutschland and Spain's DTS.
The firms have the right to respond.
In a statement, Sky UK said: “The European Commission is examining cross border access to Pay TV services across a number of member states. As part of its ongoing enquiry, we have received a statement setting out the Commission’s preliminary views. We will consider this and respond in due course.”
Confirming that it had received the EU objections, NBC Universal said "we will have the opportunity to formally respond to the statement and are communicating constructively with the European Commission."
The latest EU probe follows the recent launches of other antitrust investigations into U.S. chipmaker Qualcomm, Google, MasterCard, Amazon and Russian energy giant Gazprom.