    Variously described as elixir and rocket fuel, Cambodia’s potent rice
wine (sraa in Khmer) is an acquired taste. Not so Sombai, a line of infused
rice wines inspired by the flavored rums of Mauritius and produced in Siem
Reap by two Mauritius-French expatriates. At the Sombai shop (reservations
required), you can tour the petite infusion room, filled with glass jars
of sraa afloat with ingredients like star anise, coffee beans from Ratanakiri
province, ginger and coconut and pineapple (the wine infuses up to eight weeks
before being transferred to hand-painted bottles). Then settle in for a tasting
($5 a person) of flavors like green tea-orange (honeyed, smoky) and lemongrass
-lemon (reminiscent of a good limoncello). To sample tipples made with the wines
(the Sombai Sour, with ginger-red chili sraa and lime juice, packs a tart,
zesty punch), accompanied by local chips and other drinking foods, request
a cocktail tasting when you reserve ($10 a person).
    Don’t let the polished plating at the well-regarded Cuisine Wat Damnak
fool you: The dishes from the longtime resident French chef Joannès Rivière’s
kitchen are firmly rooted in Cambodian flavors. Making use of seasonal ingredients
that he gets from vendors at Siem Reap’s Old Market, Mr. Rivière devises two tasting
menus ($24 and $28 for five or six courses) each week. On a recent visit, Cambodia’s
iconic sour fish soup appeared in the form of a tart curry with freshwater fish and
banana trunk, and wild mushrooms gathered from forests around the temples complemented
frog meat in an Angkor Stout reduction.
    Street food in Cambodia is every bit as varied and delicious as that of Thailand
or Vietnam. Yet whether for lack of familiarity, fear of prahok (Cambodia’s pungent
super-fermented fish condiment) or hygiene worries, few visitors to the kingdom indulge.
A morning spent navigating the city’s food markets and street food stalls with the
Scottish chef Steven Halcrow or the American writer Lina Goldberg, the two behind
Siem Reap Food Tours ($75 per person), will vanquish any doubts. Expect treats like
grilled fish paste pancakes wrapped around spicy cucumber pickles, steamed rice flour
dumplings oozing coconut cream, jujube fruit (red Chinese dates) stewed in smoky palm
sugar and pumpkin-soy milk shakes. Pace yourself, or you’ll end up too stuffed to
partake of the tour’s pièce de résistance: num banh chok, cool, slippery rice
vermicelli doused with coconut-fish or chile-chicken gravy and tossed with farmed
and foraged greens and herbs, all the more delicious eaten after a visit to the
village where many families still make the noodles by hand.
