It is commonly known that students could increase their values of knowledge
by absorbing all necessary information given by their teachers during the
lessons and by practicing and analyzing a broad variety of assignments, known
also as homework. I firmly support the necessity to assign as much homework
as possible since students could improve and understand given lessons more
effectively.
Every year, frustrated and upset students complain about having too much
homework assigned by their teachers. It is understandable that unwillingness to
do their homework could be resulted due to many temptations attracting young
students in every day life. After intensive learning provided at schools, students
usually want to relax and enjoy watching interesting movies, playing video
games and spending the leisure time with their friends. Hence, doing assigned
homework is usually postponed for later time or ignored at all. This tendency of
not doing homework could result in poor and negative students' results on later
tests and would probably destroy the willingness and important habits to study
at home.
As far as I am concerned, daily homework should be assigned within different
numbers of exercises according to the overall interest and enthusiasm
demonstrated by students during the lessons. An enormous amount of
homework should not be given if most students tended to be discomforted by
not understanding given lessons. In this case, teachers should focus on
providing more accurate and elaborate explanations of their lessons unless the
students are showing potential interests for getting further information. Hence,
students, who are completely satisfied and fascinated by provided learning
materials, could polish and improve the gained knowledge at home by doing
their homework enthusiastically and effectively.
Finally, I would like to say that daily homework could give students the
opportunity to improve and enhance their knowledge gained during the school
time. Also, students' results of daily homework could show many teachers
whether their learning materials were well introduced and explained. Moreover,
it could be interpreted as an important source of information for teachers to
make the crucial decisions of whether to begin new learning objectives or
revise previously discussed lessons by assigning more homework.