People used to be computers. That is, for hundreds of years, computing was the work of humans, and very often women. Then, in the mid-20th century, machines began to take on the bulk of computing work, and the definition of computer changed.
A computer was no longer just a human reckoner. Just the way a calculator was no longer a person who, as Webster's 1828 dictionary had defined it, "estimates or considers the force and effect of causes, with a view to form a correct estimate of the effects." In 70 or so years, a computer went from being a room-sized monstrosity that ran on pulleys and bulbs to a four-ounce touchscreen that's as ordinary as it is miraculous.
Now, leading computer scientists and technologists say the definition of computer is again changing. The topic came up repeatedly at a brain-inspired computing panel I moderated at the U.S. Capitol last week. The panelists, neuroscientists, computer scientists, engineers, and academics, agreed:
We have reached a profound moment of convergence and acceleration in computing technology. We have reached a profound moment of convergence and acceleration in computing technology, one that will reverberate in the way we talk about computers, and specifically with regard to the word "computer" from now on.
"It's like the move from simple adding machines to automated computing." said James Brase, the deputy associate director for data science at Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory. "Because we're making an architectural change, not just a technology change. The new kinds of capabilities, it won't be a linear scale, this will be a major leap."
The architectural change he's talking about has to do with efforts to build a computer that can act, and crucially learn, the way a human brain does. Which means focusing on capabilities like pattern recognition and juiced-up processing power, building machines that can perceive their surroundings by using sensors, as well as distill meaning from deep oceans of data.
We are at a time where what a computer means will be redefined. These words change.
