Rice should be cooked in a coffee percolator because it contains dangerous levels of carcinogenic arsenic, scientists have said.
People who eat a lot of rice are exposed to dangerous levels of arsenic which can cause lung and bladder cancer, researchers at Queen’s University in Belfast claim.
But now they have come up with a simple solution. Allowing rice to steam in a normal coffee percolator removes 85 per cent of the arsenic, they found.
Rice is the only major crop grown under the flooded conditions of paddy fields. It is this flooding that releases inorganic arsenic, normally locked up in soil minerals, which is then absorbed by the plant. Too much arsenic is associated with a range of health problems.
Andy Meharg, Professor of Plant and Soil Sciences at Queen's Institute for Global Food Security said: “This is a very significant breakthrough as this offers an immediate solution to decreasing inorganic arsenic in the diet.
“In our research we rethought the method of rice cooking to optimise the removal of inorganic arsenic and we discovered that by using percolating technology, where cooking water is continually passed through rice in a constant flow, we could maximise removal of arsenic.
Cooking rice in a percolator can decrease the risk of exposure to inorganic arsenic
“Chronic exposure to inorganic arsenic can cause a range of health problems including developmental problems, heart disease, diabetes and nervous system damage. However, most worrying are lung and bladder cancers.”
Rice has, typically, ten times more inorganic arsenic than other foods and according to the European Food Standards Authority, people who eat a lot of rice, as is the case in many parts of the developing world, are exposed to worrying concentrations.
Children and infants are of particular concern as they eat, relatively, three times more rice than adults – baby rice being a popular food for weaning – and their organs are still developing.
Queen’s is at the patent stage for the development of a bespoke rice cooker based on a percolation system which means consumers could soon have this technology in their own kitchen.
The results are published in the PLOS ONE journal.
Food Standards Agency advice on rice
What is the official advice on how to avoid the health risks associated with arsenic in rice?
The FSA says it is the responsibility of manufacturers to ensure that the food they produce is as low as possible in arsenic
Children under four and a half years of age should not be given rice milk as a substitute for breast milk, formula or regular milk