A new study led by Professor Charles Spence, the Oxford University gastrophysicist making waves in the food industry, has proven beyond doubt that making something look good makes it effectively taste better too. What's interesting, is that where previous studies have focused on sophisticated dishes –sauteed chicken breast with a fines herbes sauce, brown rice pilaf and sauteed green beans with toasted almonds – and Michelin-style plating – arranging a 17-component salad to look like a Kandinsky abstraction – here the plates in question featured a simple garden salad (leaves and cucumber with other unspecified ingredients), and steak and chips.
Spence's team found that even with such basic dishes, thoughtful presentation meant diners found the food more flavourful: cutting the fillet horizontally, thereby showing the inner colour of the meat, or serving the cucumber thinly sliced on top of the other salad ingredients, made both dishes considerably more appetising – and appear to be more expensive. In the case of the salad, diners were willing to spend three times more for that decorative assemblage, 3.85, as opposed to 1.35 for the unprepared version. While it seems patently obvious that if you’re going to buy a salad, you'd rather it actually be prepared, it is noteworthy that that preparation is valued twice as high as the raw ingredients. When it comes to food, it seems we are willing to pay quite a bit for attentive labour. As Amy Fleming writes, about the Kandinsky salad, other people's effort tastes good. On the other hand, too much fuss is offputting: as Jay Rayner noted last month, fine dining is on the wane. When eating out, for the most part, we want good food, but little faff.
But what of the food we prepare ourselves? Does the same degree of effort go into what we put on our own plates? Fleming, at the end of her piece, resolves to make sure it does, especially when hurriedly dishing up dinner for her kids: "Food plonked on to the plate willy-nilly makes them deeply suspicious" she writes, “whereas a pleasing pattern or an artful arrangement gets things off on a fine footing."