Barcelona and Real Madrid would not dominate the Premier League, says Jose Mourinho.
For years, the debate has raged between opposing fans as to whether or not Barcelona and Real Madrid would achieve similar success in the Premier League as the two La Liga giants achieve in Spanish football.
Real Madrid have won the league 32 times, while Barcelona were recently crowned La Liga champions for the 23rd time in club history; both teams finished as league runners-up 22 and 24 times, respectively.
The next closest team is Atletico Madrid, who won La Liga for the tenth time in 2013-14.
It has long been argued that Spanish football in a duopoly which is dominated by Real Madrid and Barcelona, and it appears the statistics support that claim.
Despite the recent surge from Diego Simeone’s Atletico Madrid side, the rejuvenated play of Valencia and Villarreal and the Europa League success of Sevilla; La Liga is still considered a two-team league.
During an interview with talkSPORT, Chelsea manager Jose Mourinho insisted it would be impossible for Barcelona and Real Madrid to dominate English football in the way they do in Spain.
Mourinho, who won the La Liga title in 2011-12 with Real Madrid, claims the La Liga giants would find life much more difficult in England.
“I was in Spain, but I didn’t enjoy it,” the Chelsea boss told talkSPORT.
“I didn’t enjoy it because I won a title with a record in Spain with 100 points and 121 goals, but we played only three or four matches all season.
“I lost a title with 92 points, but again we only played four or five matches in the season.
“You feel the pressure that you have to win every match because if you don’t you are not champions. You have to win and win and win. But it is a big, big gap between the giants and the others.
“In matches in other countries you can win matches when you are resting. In Spain and in Italy, I won lots of matches resting. Where you can think, ‘what next?’ Where you can think which European game is coming, where you can rest players.
“This season I rested a few played against Bradford and I lost against Bradford. And that is English football. You are winning 2-0 and if you concede a goal you know you are going to have hell for the last few minutes and you might draw 2-2 and lost two points.
“This is the reality of the Premier League. You have no time. It’s not just about the number of matches, it’s the intensity. And it’s not just physical intensity, you feel the intensity mentally.
“I think the difference between the two leagues [Premier League and La Liga] is huge.
“Would they [Barcelona and Real Madrid] win the Premier League? Maybe yes, maybe no.”