Both a leader and members play crucial roles in a team. However, being a leader
asks for much more talent and special ability in dealing with challenges and
different types of people. The truth is that very few people have these qualities.
Therefore, I think for majority of people, being a member is better, for that would
be the position where one can make the most contribution and make one's life
worthwhile.
First of all, being a member does not mean being less significant in the success of
a task. Often enough, people are amazed by the glory of a successful leader, who
has to bear the extra pressure, responsibility and risks to achieve the supreme
statue and to gain the power of authority. However, people overlook the vital
contributions made by the group members and think them as less important. They
also forget about the fact that the main body of a group is made up by members
who is the main driveling force that makes plans into reality. A captain of a ship is
the leader who needs to give instruction on how he wants the ship to be driven. All
other cruise members need to do their jobs well to ensure that the ship go into the
right direction at suitable speed. Unlike most of the people would have argued that
members just simply follow what have been told, I think members also have to
think. It is only that they have to think specifically in the area of their job instead
of think globally. Most people will work the best with a specific goal in the
particular area that they are most familiar with.
Secondly, being a member gain no less sense of satisfaction than being a leader.
This, of course, depends a lot on one's perspective of success. In my point of view,
success means being able to make the best of one's ability and to have achieved
the self-motivated goal. Being a member makes no less chance to be successful. In
fact, most people will perform better in this less stressful state, compared to the
highly pressured nature of a leader's work. Knowing that his accomplishment of
the assigned task contribute to the overall success of the group, and the vital role
he has played in supporting other members and the leader, one can appreciate the
fruit of success.
Last but not least, being a member means more involvement with the actual
process of the work and naturally leads to closer bond with other colleagues.
Usually, after working closely together after a period of time in a project, a mutual
understanding naturally develops between the members. This would take a leader
great effort and maybe a long time to be regarded as member of the party. There is
famous Chinese traditional saying that goes, "one cannot stand the cold for being
up there." It is a well reflection of the loneliness to be a leader. On the other hand,
one can be embedded in a family of coordinators who understand each other well
and easily help and support each other.
All in all, besides the common opinion about more free time and more leisure
lifestyle of being a member instead of leader, I think the above three points are
strong enough to show that it is better to be a member for most of the people.