How to Protect Yourself From Keyloggers
A keylogger is a type of surveillance software that has the capability to record every keystroke you make to a log file, usually encrypted. Every type of keylogger is dangerous as they can record your keystrokes,tracks your activity and can record the open sites. By this your any account can be easily hacked by the hackers. These keyloggers can detects your bank accounts passwords too. So better is to be safe from these type of programs that can harms you a lot. So we are here with a method for How to Protect Yourself From Keyloggers. With this method you can protect yourself to much extent from these keyloggers. So just read out all the tips below.
Easily Protect Yourself From Keyloggers
Today many of the antivirus programs are unable to detect these malicious program that is keylogger in your computer, so better is to use to prevention measure against this to stay protected from them. So carefully read and implement all the tips discussed below to get secure from keyloggers.
Ways To Protect Yourself From Keyloggers:-
#1 Use Keyscrambler App
Keyscrambler is a nice app that encrypts your keystrokes, as you all know that keylogger records the keystrokes and if those keystrokes get encrypted then keylogger will always get wrong value of keystrokes and your all personal information in your keystrokes will get safe from the keyloggers injected by attackers on your PC.
Download : Keyscrambler
#2 Use a Good Antivirus
A good antivirus is the best way to be secure from these keyloggers as a good antivirus can easily scan out the infected program in your computer and helps you in protecting your credentials. So we prefer you to use the paid antivirus in your computer rather than rushing to the freewares that do nothing in computer except consuming your computer memory.
#3 Use Antilogger
This program can detect a keylogger in your computer and then you can completely remove it from your computer. There are lots of antiloggers are available today but you must use best of them as keyloggers are of many types that even a normal antilogger can’t detect. So we suggest you to use the Zemana AntiLogger which we consider best on the user rating and reviews.
#4 Cover your webcam
There are many computer viruses are developed in the form of keylogger that can spy on you so here best option is to cover up your webcam to secure yourself from these type of attacks. You can cover it with any bandage or a color tape or whatever you wish.
#5 Avoid Using Public Networks
In public network you can get easily hacked by the keyloggers or the spy program that get installed on the router to access the user data connected on same wifi network. So better is to avoid use of public network as there is always a risk of keyloggers being installed on your computer.
#6 Use Sandboxie In PC
Today almost every keylogger is capable of editing your system setting and which can harm you lot. So you must use this app in your PC which detects the app that can perform changes in system settings and help you to remove them all from your computer to get safe from such malicious programs.
Download : Sandboxie
#7 Use a Good Antispyware
While regular browsing on internet your computer gets lots of spyware which is the other alternative of keylogger and does the same work as the keylogger do. So better is to choose out the best spyware for your pc to get secure from these.
#8 Scan File With Multiple Antiviruses
If you find any of the program not installed by your then quickly scan out that program on online scanner that scan files with different antivirus and then give you the result about the file that it is safe to use or not.
So above are the ways for How to Protect Yourself From Keyloggers. With taking care of all the things discussed above you can secure your computer from keylogger to high extent and all your credential information and data will be secured in your computer. Hope you like our work, son don’t forget to share it with others and leave a comment below if you have any related query with this.