A great many achievements have been accomplished in recent decades in
almost every area of technology, such as in computer science, manufacture, and
medicine. But there have always existed two opposite attitudes towards
technological development. Some people agree that these new technologies
have made the world a better place to live, while others hold the opinion that
technology has caused many problems to the world. As far as I am concerned, I
agree with the first opinion that our world is becoming better for living with
technology progress. Several persuasive reasons go as follow.
Firstly, technology developments have greatly improved people's living
conditions, making our life more convenient and efficient. We have elevators
taking us to the top of a skyscraper in just a few seconds; we have air
conditioners to keep the indoor temperature comfortable; and we even have
household robots now to help to take care of the trivial housework.
Secondly, technology developments have also made communications much
easier, and thus helped to enhance relationships among people. The wide use of
pagers, mobile phones, and wireless Internet has greatly facilitated the way of
daily communication. They can bring people so close even though they may
actually be thousands of miles apart.
Thirdly, developments in technology can provide better medical access to make
people live a healthier and happier life. By taking advantages of the most recent
developments in biotechnology, such as genetic engineering, I am convinced
that people will have a promising prospect in treating all kinds of human
diseases, including AIDS and SARS.
It is true that technological developments have also brought some serious
problems. One of them is that some technological developments have done
harm to the environment. For example, too much emission of waste gases,
mainly carbon dioxide, has increased the global temperature significantly.
However, people can reduce and finally eliminate these harmful effects by
improving the technology itself or finding a more advanced and reliable
technology.
I believe that with the new technologies appropriately adopted for good
purposes, our world would be made an even better place to live.