    Barbecued chicken isn’t, really: It’s grilled rather than smoke-roasted at low temperature. 
But it requires a similar attention to technique. You’ll want to move the pieces around on 
the grill to keep them from burning, and flip them often as well. Cooking barbecued chicken 
benefits from a basting technique used by the chef and outdoor cooking maven Adam Perry Lang,
who thins out his sauce with water, then paints it onto the meat he’s cooking coat after coat,
allowing it to reduce and intensify rather than seize up and burn.
    Build a fire in your grill, leaving one side free of coals. When coals are covered with gray ash
and the temperature is medium (you can hold your hand 5 inches above the coals for 5 to 7 seconds),
you are ready to cook. (For a gas grill, turn all burners to high, lower cover and heat for 15 
minutes,then turn burners to medium.).Meanwhile, combine barbecue sauce with 1 cup water and stir
to combine.Set aside.Sprinkle the chicken pieces generously with salt and pepper, then put them
on the grill directly over the coals and cook for about 15 minutes, turning once every 5 minutes
or so, and brushing with the thinned barbecue sauce. When the chicken skin starts to crisp and
darken, move the pieces to the cooler side of the grill and let them cook for 15 to 20 minutes
more, or until a peek inside shows that the meat no longer has any red at the center.Move the
chicken back onto the hot side of the grill and baste with sauce again, turning the meat a few
times. Remove to a warmed platter and serve.
    You can grill corn with the husks on. You can strip the husks partly off, remove the silks and
re-wrap the ears, then grill. You can soak the corn in cool water before grilling. Or blanch it 
in hot. I blanch, occasionally following the lead of the celebrity chef Bobby Flay, who adds a 
cup of milk to his blanching liquid. “I have no idea why I do it,” he said. “It’s like adding 
corks to the liquid when you’re poaching octopus. Who knows if it works? But it’s a foolproof 
way to get perfect corn.” Serve with butter, as in this recipe, or dab with mayonnaise and 
sprinkle with cotija cheese.
    Build a fire in your grill, leaving one side free of coals. When coals are covered with gray
ash and the temperature is medium (you can hold your hand 5 inches above the coals for 5 to 7
seconds), you are ready to cook. (For a gas grill, turn all burners to high, lower cover and
heat for 15 minutes, then turn burners to medium.)