There's much controversy about the necessity of daily homework for students.
Some say homework is necessary since only practice makes perfect, while
others disagree because they believe a student should have the freedom to study
whatever in whatever forms just as he/she likes to.
In my opinion, daily homework is necessary for students. First, a teacher could
assign homework as a measure for the students to study. A student needs
guidance from a teacher because he/she does not have an overall understanding
of the knowledge he is going to study from the teacher. This means, at the
beginning, a student could not well plan his/her study, just as a kid who is for
the first time in a swimming pool could do nothing but to play with water. A
teacher could make a good study plan for him/her, so that he/she could learn
efficiently.
Secondly, even when a student has already understand what he/she should do in
order to master some skill or knowledge, he/she is still unwilling to do this for
the lack of motivation. Hey, do not tell me that you have never been lazy at all
when you were young. Some homework could function as a task for the student
to perform which is helpful to motivate him/her.
Thirdly, homework is an important form of feedback for a teacher to understand
the effectively of his/her teacher. As I have mentioned before, a teacher makes
a study plan for the students; but does it really work? Or does it work for all the
students? It's not difficult to know this only if the teacher pays some attention
to the homework of the students. Then he/she may be able to find if there's
some problems in his/her teaching, and make corresponding adjustment of
his/her teaching, either for all the students or for a single one. Without some
feedback, it is impossible for the teacher to do this. A test is also a good form
of feedback, but obviously one or two tests are not enough, and sometimes this
kind of feedback just comes to late.
However, This conclusion might be misleading that one may believe all forms
of homework are necessary. Actually, only proper amount of homework in
proper forms is acceptable; some homework may not only fail to help the
students, but on contrary bore them, so much so that they may lose their innate
interest to study. "Proper" homework, in my opinion, should vary in its forms;
it might be some extensive reading, a paper, or even just a game, as well as
other ordinary exercises. And it should leave enough freedom to the students so
that they could do things they really like to do with self-motivation, rather than
unwillingness. We should always remember that homework is something for us
to guide the students, rather than drive them. Only if a teacher keeps this in
his/her mind, the homework could be of most help to the students.