European regulators on Thursday opened an antitrust case against six major Hollywood movie studios and British pay-TV provider Sky UK, alleging they have illegally blocked consumers in most of Europe from watching U.S. movies, TV shows and other content.
lRelated Bipartisan support grows for corporate tax change tied to Highway Trust Fund
Bipartisan support grows for corporate tax change tied to Highway Trust Fund
The studios -- Walt Disney Studios, NBCUniversal, Paramount Pictures, Sony Pictures Entertainment, 20th Century Fox and Warner Bros. -- each face possible fines for allegedly entering into improper licensing agreements with Sky UK.
Consumer groups say FCC conditions on AT&T-DirecTV merger fall short
Those contracts prohibit viewers outside Britain and Ireland from accessing Sky UK's programming via satellite or the Internet.
"European consumers want to watch the pay-TV channels of their choice regardless of where they live or travel in the EU," said Margrethe Vestager, the EU's commissioner in charge of competition policy.
"Our investigation shows that they cannot do this today," she said.
EU regulators believe the licensing agreements, which require Sky UK to block access to movies and other studio content outside its licensing territory, violate competition rules.
The European Commission, the region's executive arm, sent a so-called statement of objections Thursday to the seven companies. The statement formally launches an antitrust case and comes after an investigation that began in January 2014.
Regulators said film studios typically license their content to a single pay-TV provider in each European Union country.
Stunning photos, celebrity homes: Get the free weekly Hot Property newsletter
Stunning photos, celebrity homes: Get the free weekly Hot Property newsletter
But the clauses in the licensing agreements grant "absolute territorial exclusivity" to Sky UK, eliminate competition across country borders between pay-TV providers and "partition the internal market along national borders."
The European Commission's preliminary view is that such clauses violate rules against anti-competitive agreements.