    Whether youSare commuting to work by train, car or bike, the trip can become monotonous.
But with the right mix of technology, there are plenty of ways to keep the travel time 
from dragging. Here are some notable gadgets to make your daily commute less of a grind.
    Bosch eBike Systems are designed to make pedaling to work easier. The company, a German
manufacturer of automotive parts and electronics, has turned its expertise to bicycles,
working with cycling brands like Cube and Haibike to make powered bikes that are sold 
by independent dealers. (Offerings from partners like Cannondale and Trek are expected
next year.) Bosch components include a power pack and charger that can last up to 100 
miles, a drive unit that delivers a boost of power and an onboard computer that allows
riders to track data and switch modes. Five drive modes give a different level of power.
For instance, the sport mode provides an immediate burst, which is good for city traffic,
and the tour mode provides steady support, which is suited for longer rides. Bosch does
not make retrofitting kits, however, so riders need to visit an independent bike dealer
to buy one outfitted with the eBike System.
    STM’s Drifter backpack has many useful features, including an ergonomic design, 
water-resistant fabric, zippered pockets and roomy, padded compartments. What more could
you possibly want in a backpack? STM has the answer: an integrated energy supply to charge
your devices. New to the Drifter backpack is Joey, a smart battery system that offers
high-speed charging that adjusts according to the device and a temperature sensor that
protects the device and bag from overheating. Best of all, Joey has its own pocket and
cord management system, so it won’t take up extra storage space. STM’s messenger bag,
the Bowery, also incorporates Joey.
    Many smartphone cases are designed to hold credit cards and driver’s licenses, but most
don’t actually do the job very well. The updated CandyShell Card smartphone case from Speck
is a nice exception. Speck says the CandyShell Card case’s side-loading slot will hold up
to three cards securely. But it can also hold just a single, thin transit card, thanks to
a tiny grip in the slot that keeps the card in place. And Speck’s patented CandyShell design,
with a hard exterior, rubberized interior and raised bezel, protects phones from shock caused
by bumps and drops.
 