La Liga and Champions League winners Barcelona say summer spending is over.
Barcelona have completed their business in the latest transfer window and the Spanish and European champions’ squad is now “closed”, president Josep Maria Bartomeu has confirmed.
Barça have brought in the Turkey playmaker Arda Turan and the versatile Spain defender Aleix Vidal since winning the treble last season and Bartomeu indicated the club would not be buying or selling any more players before the window closes at the end of next month.
Neither Arda nor Vidal will be available to coach Luis Enrique until January, however, as Barça have been banned by Fifa from registering new signings until then after they broke rules on the transfer of foreign under-18 players.
Bartomeu’s comments, made as he joined up with the team in San Francisco on their pre-season tour, suggest Barça’s Spain forward Pedro, who has been linked with a move to English clubs Chelsea or Manchester United, will be staying.
“We have a complete and balanced squad and Luis Enrique is happy with the players he has,” said Bartomeu, fresh from victory in Saturday’s presidential election.
“We need all the players because this season the team has a chance of winning all the competitions we are playing in,” he added.
Barça had not received an official approach for either Pedro or Adriano, Bartomeu said, amid reports the Brazilian full-back is poised to join the Italian side Roma.
The Catalan club won their opening pre-season friendly match against LA Galaxy this week 2-1 and play further friendlies against Manchester United in Santa Clara on Saturday and Chelsea in Landover on 28 July.
They return to Europe to play the Serie A club Fiorentina in Florence on 2 August before their first competitive match of the 2015-16 season, the European Super Cup against Europa League winners and La Liga rivals Sevilla on 11 August.
Barça then play Athletic Bilbao over two legs for the Spanish Super Cup before they get their bid for a sixth La Liga title in eight years under way against the Basque club on the weekend of 22-23 August.