    In the evening, Aadya would cook up a feast of curry, rice and chapattis
(flat Indian breads used for scooping up mouthfuls of food from a rough-hewn
wooden bowl). Sometimes, for a treat, there would be chicken in the curry.
Eating with a family every night, being welcomed into the circle of conversation,
playing cards with Marymut by flickering candlelight – I felt at home.
    The weeks drifted by as we slowly worked our way through the jungle. Every
day, the piping got closer to the village, and I knew that, soon, it would be
time to leave.
    The final day came and went in a whirlwind of emotion. Marigold garlands
– the hallmark of both a great celebration and day of mourning – were handed
out by the village elders. There was whooping and shouting, crying and cursing.
I was not ready to leave. I had come here to do a job but somehow, along the
way, I had been accepted into a new family, one that utterly different from
my one back home. I had been shown a simpler way of life and a more tranquil
way of interacting with people.
     The final hour rushed by like a charging beast. Marymut and Aadya hugged
me as I turned to go. Aadya’s eyes were filled with tears. I passed her my Swiss
army knife, gestured at Marymut, and mimed that she mustn't let him cut himself.
She smiled at me and hugged me again. I kissed her on the top of the head, squeezed
her hand and turned, tears threatening to spill down my cheeks. I shouldered my pack.
Marymut walked alongside me, bawling in the way that only a kid on the cusp of becoming
a teenager can. I too began to cry. I dropped to one knee.
     But to keep my promise 12 months on, I first had to find the village – which
was proving increasingly difficult. I could feel the bemused eyes of my mother and
father in the back seat boring into my skull. Perhaps bringing them to meet my Indian 
family had not been such a good idea.
     I had been travelling in India for several months now, slowly working my way
from Rajasthan in the north down to Tamil Nadu. I had told my parents about my Indian
family many times, and, on a whim, they had flown out from England to meet me and the
villagers. All we had to do was find them.
     An elephant suddenly surged out of the foliage about 20m away, staring directly
at us. The taxi driver looked at me, looked at the elephant and let out a low moan
of terror. He closed his eyes, chanting something quietly. When he opened his eyes,
the elephant was gone, back into the bush from which it had materialised.
     