White Death - By Jason Bellows

In April of 1938, representatives from the USSR approached the Finnish government and expressed a concern that Nazi Germany could attempt to invade Russia, and such an attack might come through parts of Finland. The Finns replied that they were officially neutral, but any Nazi incursion on Finland’s borders would be resisted. This did not mollify the Soviets. Hitler’s manifesto, Mein Kampf, was published thirteen years previous with specific note that the Nazis would need to invade the Soviet Union. The Red Army was determined to “advance to meet the enemy” and refused to accept promises from the smaller country. As negotiations continued, the Soviets tried to coax Finland into leasing or ceding some area to serve as a buffer to Leningrad. In November 1939, however, all negotiations ceased, and on 30 November 1939 the Soviet Red Army invaded Finland.

In the municipality of Rautjärvi near the Soviet/Finnish border, 34-year-old Simo Häyhä was a farmer and hunter leading a flagrantly unexciting life. Upon news of the hostilities, he gathered up food, plain white camouflage, and his iron-sighted SAKO M/28-30—a variant of the Soviet Mosin-Nagant rifle—and went to defend his country. Before the four-month war ended, humble Häyhä would gain infamy among the Russian invaders, and come to be known as the “White Death.”

Simo Häyhä’s vacated farmhouse was littered with trophies he’d won for marksmanship. Reportedly, Häyhä could hit a target 150 meters away 16 times in one minute. He served his required year in the Finnish military starting in 1925, and was discharged as a corporal. Thereafter he joined the Civil Guard, the Finnish analog of the US National Guard. Over the years, Häyhä drilled with the Civil Guard until he was called back into service.

At the time, the entire population of Finland numbered around three million, while the USSR was nearer to 171 million. The Finns knew they were outmanned at about one hundred to one, and therefore opted for a defensive, guerrilla-style strategy. Häyhä’s first active-duty assignment was with Jaeger Regiment 34 stationed along the Kollaa River.

The Winter War was brutally cold. Rarely did the temperature exceed zero degrees Fahrenheit, but the genital-constricting cold was inadequate to stop Häyhä. Usually he would don his warmest uniform and wrap it with a white snowsuit, mitts, and mask, wrap a few days’ worth of food in cloth, pocket fifty to seventy rounds of ammunition, and hike out into the bush with his rifle and a submachine gun. He would find himself a vantage point in some brush or in the boughs of a tree, and wait—sometimes for days—for a target of opportunity. The invading Soviets tended to adhere to established roads, and Häyhä would entrench himself in the terrain within view. Often he would choose to forfeit possible targets to engender a sense of security and lure more appealing prey like officers and supply trains into his sights.

The Soviets began to react to Häyhä’s success by ordering artillery strikes on suspected sniper nests, and employing counter-snipers. One Russian sniper killed several Finnish soldiers and three officers, and was on the hunt for a particularly troublesome Finn with a Mosin-Nagant M91. He made one kill early in the day, giving Häyhä a general location of his adversary. Häyhä slowly crept through the snow to gain position. When the sun began to set, the Soviet sniper decided that his chance was past and rose to his knees. The sun glinted on his 3x scope; Häyhä was still patiently waiting and caught sight of the movement. Häyhä put a single shot through the Soviet’s head from 450 meters.

Despite Häyhä’s success, the Soviets were winning the war. The Finns were forced to fall back almost 40 kilometers, to the banks of the Kollaa River. The Finns knew that if the Soviets gained a path across the river they would be able to attack the defensive lines from the rear. An area known as Kollaa Hill suddenly became a high-priority target for the Soviets as a chance to cross the river. Jaeger Regiment 34, though in need of supply and reinforcement, was ordered to defend the hill. Both sides knew the Finns were outmanned, and what artillery they had was old and useless against the Soviet Armored Infantry. A Soviet division tried to take the hill from a Finnish regiment, but did not account for the defenders’ indefatigability. They failed. The Soviets thought two divisions could overcome the same regiment, but the Finns adopted a formidable battle cry: “They shall not pass!” The battle carried on for weeks while the Finns lost soldiers and depleted their supplies, and the Soviet forces were reinforced. During the daylight hours, the Soviets would bombard the Finnish lines. The Finns would hunker down in shelter until nightfall brought an end to artillery fire, and then sneak out to make repairs during the bitter cold darkness. The Finnish forces lost several men to exhaustion as the battle continued unabated.

Early in the Battle of Kollaa, the Soviets employed tactics of overwhelming force, but the Finns developed a counter-strategy called “Motti” tactics, a name derived from the Finnish word for “encircled.” The Finns would open their lines for the Soviet advance and allow the leading elements through. Once the Soviets passed, the Finns would rally, close the line again to prevent any aid from arriving, and attack the leading element from the sides and rear. As the Soviets lost units to this unconventional tactic, they were forced to alter their attacks to hold territory, and therefore slow the advance while increasing their investments of manpower and equipment.

21 December 1939 was Häyhä’s personal record for a single day with 25 confirmed Russian kills. Around this time, Häyhä surpassed 500 confirmed kills between the rifle and SMG. When the Russians finally figured out there was just one guy with a rifle killing dozens of their men, they started referring to him as “The White Death.”

Come mid-January, the Soviets were still fighting for Kollaa. In an effort to break the deadlock, the advance was halted for the Soviets to resupply. After two days to regroup, the attack resumed with renewed fervor to break the Finnish lines. One component of this attack was the Battle of Killer Hill where 32 Finns faced an onslaught of four thousand Soviets. Each side gained and lost ground over several days. Eventually the Soviets opted to refocus their efforts on another target—presumably due to having lost four hundred men in the engagement. Of the original 32 defenders of Killer Hill, only four survived to see the battle victoriously ended.

Even as France and Great Britain sent offers of aid to the Finns, the frustrated and desperate Soviets rallied for one final push. Air raids and artillery barrages escalated. Ground troops pushed forward only to be attacked, usually by smaller forces at all sides. The Soviets, however, were now acquainted with the Finnish Motti tactic, and knew better than to pursue the attackers into the woods, become isolated, and be systematically killed. This time they opted to dig in and entrench whatever position they could. Little circles of Soviet forces cropped up through the countryside, too well armed for the Finns to dislodge or destroy, but also without supplies and unable to advance.

On 6 March 1940, newly promoted Lieutenant Simo Häyhä was with a small group of ski-troops, fighting against a much larger Soviet force. As noon neared, Häyhä had forty confirmed kills for the day, but his luck changed. A single explosive round hit him in the upper-left side of his jaw. The men who evacuated Häyhä reported “half his face missing,” but loaded him on a train toward care. He remained comatose for four days. He awoke with a shattered jaw only hours after the signing of the Moscow Peace Treaty which officially ended the Winter War.

The terms of the treaty allowed the Soviets to retain a large swath of Finland’s territory, including Häyhä’s home of Rautjärvi. Häyhä was but one of 422,000 Finns left homeless by the war. One Soviet general remarked, “We have won enough ground to bury our dead.”

Some historians have speculated that in the early days of World War II, Hitler and his advisers looked at the Soviets’ heavy losses against Finland and concluded that the Soviets might not be able to properly defend Leningrad, and it could be taken with little fight. If so, this may have been the Nazis’ greatest logistical error.

As for Häyhä, he was awarded five medals after the war, wrote a book about his service, and was occasionally invited to appear at events honoring military service. Described as quiet and congenial, when asked the secret of how he accumulated 505 confirmed sniper kills, he would smile and reply, “Practice.” Simo “The White Death” Häyhä died of natural causes in 2002 aged 96.

1Harry Potter and the Sorcerer's StoneCHAPTER ONETHE BOY WHO LIVEDMr. and Mrs. Dursley, of number four, Privet Drive, were proud to saythat they were perfectly normal, thank you very much. They were the lastpeople you'd expect to be involved in anything strange or mysterious,because they just didn't hold with such nonsense.Mr. Dursley was the director of a firm called Grunnings, which madedrills. He was a big, beefy man with hardly any neck, although he didhave a very large mustache. Mrs. Dursley was thin and blonde and hadnearly twice the usual amount of neck, which came in very useful as shespent so much of her time craning over garden fences, spying on theneighbors. The Dursleys had a small son called Dudley and in theiropinion there was no finer boy anywhere.The Dursleys had everything they wanted, but they also had a secret, andtheir greatest fear was that somebody would discover it. They didn'tthink they could bear it if anyone found out about the Potters. Mrs.Potter was Mrs. Dursley's sister, but they hadn't met for several years;in fact, Mrs. Dursley pretended she didn't have a sister, because hersister and her good-for-nothing husband were as unDursleyish as it waspossible to be. The Dursleys shuddered to think what the neighbors wouldsay if the Potters arrived in the street. The Dursleys knew that thePotters had a small son, too, but they had never even seen him. This boywas another good reason for keeping the Potters away; they didn't wantDudley mixing with a child like that.When Mr. and Mrs. Dursley woke up on the dull, gray Tuesday our storystarts, there was nothing about the cloudy sky outside to suggest thatstrange and mysterious things would soon be happening all over thecountry. Mr. Dursley hummed as he picked out his most boring tie forwork, and Mrs. Dursley gossiped away happily as she wrestled a screamingDudley into his high chair.None of them noticed a large, tawny owl flutter past the window.At half past eight, Mr. Dursley picked up his briefcase, pecked Mrs.Dursley on the cheek, and tried to kiss Dudley good-bye but missed,




2because Dudley was now having a tantrum and throwing his cereal at thewalls. "Little tyke," chortled Mr. Dursley as he left the house. He gotinto his car and backed out of number four's drive.It was on the corner of the street that he noticed the first sign ofsomething peculiar -- a cat reading a map. For a second, Mr. Dursleydidn't realize what he had seen -- then he jerked his head around tolook again. There was a tabby cat standing on the corner of PrivetDrive, but there wasn't a map in sight. What could he have been thinkingof? It must have been a trick of the light. Mr. Dursley blinked andstared at the cat. It stared back. As Mr. Dursley drove around thecorner and up the road, he watched the cat in his mirror. It was nowreading the sign that said Privet Drive -- no, looking at the sign; catscouldn't read maps or signs. Mr. Dursley gave himself a little shake andput the cat out of his mind. As he drove toward town he thought ofnothing except a large order of drills he was hoping to get that day.But on the edge of town, drills were driven out of his mind by somethingelse. As he sat in the usual morning traffic jam, he couldn't helpnoticing that there seemed to be a lot of strangely dressed peopleabout. People in cloaks. Mr. Dursley couldn't bear people who dressed infunny clothes -- the getups you saw on young people! He supposed thiswas some stupid new fashion. He drummed his fingers on the steeringwheel and his eyes fell on a huddle of these weirdos standing quiteclose by. They were whispering excitedly together. Mr. Dursley wasenraged to see that a couple of them weren't young at all; why, that manhad to be older than he was, and wearing an emerald-green cloak! Thenerve of him! But then it struck Mr. Dursley that this was probably somesilly stunt -- these people were obviously collecting for something...yes, that would be it. The traffic moved on and a few minutes later, Mr.Dursley arrived in the Grunnings parking lot, his mind back on drills.Mr. Dursley always sat with his back to the window in his office on theninth floor. If he hadn't, he might have found it harder to concentrateon drills that morning. He didn't see the owls swoop ing past in broaddaylight, though people down in the street did; they pointed and gazedopen- mouthed as owl after owl sped overhead. Most of them had neverseen an owl even at nighttime. Mr. Dursley, however, had a perfectlynormal, owl-free morning. He yelled at five different people. He madeseveral important telephone calls and shouted a bit more. He was in avery good mood until lunchtime, when he thought he'd stretch his legsand walk across the road to buy himself a bun from the bakery.




3He'd forgotten all about the people in cloaks until he passed a group ofthem next to the baker's. He eyed them angrily as he passed. He didn'tknow why, but they made him uneasy. This bunch were whisperingexcitedly, too, and he couldn't see a single collecting tin. It was onhis way back past them, clutching a large doughnut in a bag, that hecaught a few words of what they were saying."The Potters, that's right, that's what I heard yes, their son, Harry"Mr. Dursley stopped dead. Fear flooded him. He looked back at thewhisperers as if he wanted to say something to them, but thought betterof it.He dashed back across the road, hurried up to his office, snapped at hissecretary not to disturb him, seized his telephone, and had almostfinished dialing his home number when he changed his mind. He put thereceiver back down and stroked his mustache, thinking... no, he wasbeing stupid. Potter wasn't such an unusual name. He was sure there werelots of people called Potter who had a son called Harry. Come to thinkof it, he wasn't even sure his nephew was called Harry. He'd never evenseen the boy. It might have been Harvey. Or Harold. There was no pointin worrying Mrs. Dursley; she always got so upset at any mention of hersister. He didn't blame her -- if he'd had a sister like that... but allthe same, those people in cloaks...He found it a lot harder to concentrate on drills that afternoon andwhen he left the building at five o'clock, he was still so worried thathe walked straight into someone just outside the door."Sorry," he grunted, as the tiny old man stumbled and almost fell. Itwas a few seconds before Mr. Dursley realized that the man was wearing aviolet cloak. He didn't seem at all upset at being almost knocked to theground. On the contrary, his face split into a wide smile and he said ina squeaky voice that made passersby stare, "Don't be sorry, my dear sir,for nothing could upset me today! Rejoice, for You-Know-Who has gone atlast! Even Muggles like yourself should be celebrating, this happy,happy day!"And the old man hugged Mr. Dursley around the middle and walked off.Mr. Dursley stood rooted to the spot. He had been hugged by a completestranger. He also thought he had been called a Muggle, whatever thatwas. He was rattled. He hurried to his car and set off for home, hoping




4he was imagining things, which he had never hoped before, because hedidn't approve of imagination.As he pulled into the driveway of number four, the first thing he saw --and it didn't improve his mood -- was the tabby cat he'd spotted thatmorning. It was now sitting on his garden wall. He was sure it was thesame one; it had the same markings around its eyes."Shoo!" said Mr. Dursley loudly. The cat didn't move. It just gave him astern look. Was this normal cat behavior? Mr. Dursley wondered. Tryingto pull himself together, he let himself into the house. He was stilldetermined not to mention anything to his wife.Mrs. Dursley had had a nice, normal day. She told him over dinner allabout Mrs. Next Door's problems with her daughter and how Dudley hadlearned a new word ("Won't!"). Mr. Dursley tried to act normally. WhenDudley had been put to bed, he went into the living room in time tocatch the last report on the evening news:"And finally, bird-watchers everywhere have reported that the nation'sowls have been behaving very unusually today. Although owls normallyhunt at night and are hardly ever seen in daylight, there have beenhundreds of sightings of these birds flying in every direction sincesunrise. Experts are unable to explain why the owls have suddenlychanged their sleeping pattern." The newscaster allowed himself a grin."Most mysterious. And now, over to Jim McGuffin with the weather. Goingto be any more showers of owls tonight, Jim?""Well, Ted," said the weatherman, "I don't know about that, but it's notonly the owls that have been acting oddly today. Viewers as far apart asKent, Yorkshire, and Dundee have been phoning in to tell me that insteadof the rain I promised yesterday, they've had a downpour of shootingstars! Perhaps people have been celebrating Bonfire Night early -- it'snot until next week, folks! But I can promise a wet night tonight."Mr. Dursley sat frozen in his armchair. Shooting stars all over Britain?Owls flying by daylight? Mysterious people in cloaks all over the place?And a whisper, a whisper about the Potters...Mrs. Dursley came into the living room carrying two cups of tea. It wasno good. He'd have to say something to her. He cleared his throatnervously. "Er -- Petunia, dear -- you haven't heard from your sisterlately, have you?"




5As he had expected, Mrs. Dursley looked shocked and angry. After all,they normally pretended she didn't have a sister."No," she said sharply. "Why?""Funny stuff on the news," Mr. Dursley mumbled. "Owls... shootingstars... and there were a lot of funny-looking people in town today...""So?" snapped Mrs. Dursley."Well, I just thought... maybe... it was something to do with... youknow... her crowd."Mrs. Dursley sipped her tea through pursed lips. Mr. Dursley wonderedwhether he dared tell her he'd heard the name "Potter." He decided hedidn't dare. Instead he said, as casually as he could, "Their son --he'd be about Dudley's age now, wouldn't he?""I suppose so," said Mrs. Dursley stiffly."What's his name again? Howard, isn't it?""Harry. Nasty, common name, if you ask me.""Oh, yes," said Mr. Dursley, his heart sinking horribly. "Yes, I quiteagree."He didn't say another word on the subject as they went upstairs to bed.While Mrs. Dursley was in the bathroom, Mr. Dursley crept to the bedroomwindow and peered down into the front garden. The cat was still there.It was staring down Privet Drive as though it were waiting forsomething.Was he imagining things? Could all this have anything to do with thePotters? If it did... if it got out that they were related to a pair of-- well, he didn't think he could bear it.The Dursleys got into bed. Mrs. Dursley fell asleep quickly but Mr.Dursley lay awake, turning it all over in his mind. His last, comfortingthought before he fell asleep was that even if the Potters wereinvolved, there was no reason for them to come near him and Mrs.Dursley. The Potters knew very well what he and Petunia thought about




6them and their kind.... He couldn't see how he and Petunia could getmixed up in anything that might be going on -- he yawned and turned over-- it couldn't affect them....How very wrong he was.Mr. Dursley might have been drifting into an uneasy sleep, but the caton the wall outside was showing no sign of sleepiness. It was sitting asstill as a statue, its eyes fixed unblinkingly on the far corner ofPrivet Drive. It didn't so much as quiver when a car door slammed on thenext street, nor when two owls swooped overhead. In fact, it was nearlymidnight before the cat moved at all.A man appeared on the corner the cat had been watching, appeared sosuddenly and silently you'd have thought he'd just popped out of theground. The cat's tail twitched and its eyes narrowed.Nothing like this man had ever been seen on Privet Drive. He was tall,thin, and very old, judging by the silver of his hair and beard, whichwere both long enough to tuck into his belt. He was wearing long robes,a purple cloak that swept the ground, and high-heeled, buckled boots.His blue eyes were light, bright, and sparkling behind half-moonspectacles and his nose was very long and crooked, as though it had beenbroken at least twice. This man's name was Albus Dumbledore.Albus Dumbledore didn't seem to realize that he had just arrived in astreet where everything from his name to his boots was unwelcome. He wasbusy rummaging in his cloak, looking for something. But he did seem torealize he was being watched, because he looked up suddenly at the cat,which was still staring at him from the other end of the street. Forsome reason, the sight of the cat seemed to amuse him. He chuckled andmuttered, "I should have known."He found what he was looking for in his inside pocket. It seemed to be asilver cigarette lighter. He flicked it open, held it up in the air, andclicked it. The nearest street lamp went out with a little pop. Heclicked it again -- the next lamp flickered into darkness. Twelve timeshe clicked the Put-Outer, until the only lights left on the whole streetwere two tiny pinpricks in the distance, which were the eyes of the catwatching him. If anyone looked out of their window now, even beady-eyedMrs. Dursley, they wouldn't be able to see anything that was happeningdown on the pavement. Dumbledore slipped the Put-Outer back inside hiscloak and set off down the street toward number four, where he sat down




7on the wall next to the cat. He didn't look at it, but after a moment hespoke to it."Fancy seeing you here, Professor McGonagall."He turned to smile at the tabby, but it had gone. Instead he was smilingat a rather severe-looking woman who was wearing square glasses exactlythe shape of the markings the cat had had around its eyes. She, too, waswearing a cloak, an emerald one. Her black hair was drawn into a tightbun. She looked distinctly ruffled."How did you know it was me?" she asked."My dear Professor, I 've never seen a cat sit so stiffly.""You'd be stiff if you'd been sitting on a brick wall all day," saidProfessor McGonagall."All day? When you could have been celebrating? I must have passed adozen feasts and parties on my way here."Professor McGonagall sniffed angrily."Oh yes, everyone's celebrating, all right," she said impatiently."You'd think they'd be a bit more careful, but no -- even the Muggleshave noticed something's going on. It was on their news." She jerked herhead back at the Dursleys' dark living-room window. "I heard it. Flocksof owls... shooting stars.... Well, they're not completely stupid. Theywere bound to notice something. Shooting stars down in Kent -- I'll betthat was Dedalus Diggle. He never had much sense.""You can't blame them," said Dumbledore gently. "We've had preciouslittle to celebrate for eleven years.""I know that," said Professor McGonagall irritably. "But that's noreason to lose our heads. People are being downright careless, out onthe streets in broad daylight, not even dressed in Muggle clothes,swapping rumors."She threw a sharp, sideways glance at Dumbledore here, as though hopinghe was going to tell her something, but he didn't, so she went on. "Afine thing it would be if, on the very day YouKnow-Who seems to havedisappeared at last, the Muggles found out about us all. I suppose he




8really has gone, Dumbledore?""It certainly seems so," said Dumbledore. "We have much to be thankfulfor. Would you care for a lemon drop?""A what?""A lemon drop. They're a kind of Muggle sweet I'm rather fond of""No, thank you," said Professor McGonagall coldly, as though she didn'tthink this was the moment for lemon drops. "As I say, even ifYou-Know-Who has gone -""My dear Professor, surely a sensible person like yourself can call himby his name? All this 'You- Know-Who' nonsense -- for eleven years Ihave been trying to persuade people to call him by his proper name:Voldemort." Professor McGonagall flinched, but Dumbledore, who wasunsticking two lemon drops, seemed not to notice. "It all gets soconfusing if we keep saying 'You-Know-Who.' I have never seen any reasonto be frightened of saying Voldemort's name."I know you haven 't, said Professor McGonagall, sounding halfexasperated, half admiring. "But you're different. Everyone knows you'rethe only one You-Know- oh, all right, Voldemort, was frightened of.""You flatter me," said Dumbledore calmly. "Voldemort had powers I willnever have.""Only because you're too -- well -- noble to use them.""It's lucky it's dark. I haven't blushed so much since Madam Pomfreytold me she liked my new earmuffs."Professor McGonagall shot a sharp look at Dumbledore and said, "The owlsare nothing next to the rumors that are flying around. You know whateveryone's saying? About why he's disappeared? About what finallystopped him?"It seemed that Professor McGonagall had reached the point she was mostanxious to discuss, the real reason she had been waiting on a cold, hardwall all day, for neither as a cat nor as a woman had she fixedDumbledore with such a piercing stare as she did now. It was plain thatwhatever "everyone" was saying, she was not going to believe it until




9Dumbledore told her it was true. Dumbledore, however, was choosinganother lemon drop and did not answer."What they're saying," she pressed on, "is that last night Voldemortturned up in Godric's Hollow. He went to find the Potters. The rumor isthat Lily and James Potter are -- are -- that they're -- dead. "Dumbledore bowed his head. Professor McGonagall gasped."Lily and James... I can't believe it... I didn't want to believe it...Oh, Albus..."Dumbledore reached out and patted her on the shoulder. "I know... Iknow..." he said heavily.Professor McGonagall's voice trembled as she went on. "That's not all.They're saying he tried to kill the Potter's son, Harry. But -- hecouldn't. He couldn't kill that little boy. No one knows why, or how,but they're saying that when he couldn't kill Harry Potter, Voldemort'spower somehow broke -- and that's why he's gone.Dumbledore nodded glumly."It's -- it's true?" faltered Professor McGonagall. "After all he'sdone... all the people he's killed... he couldn't kill a little boy?It's just astounding... of all the things to stop him... but how in thename of heaven did Harry survive?""We can only guess," said Dumbledore. "We may never know."Professor McGonagall pulled out a lace handkerchief and dabbed at hereyes beneath her spectacles. Dumbledore gave a great sniff as he took agolden watch from his pocket and examined it. It was a very odd watch.It had twelve hands but no numbers; instead, little planets were movingaround the edge. It must have made sense to Dumbledore, though, becausehe put it back in his pocket and said, "Hagrid's late. I suppose it washe who told you I'd be here, by the way?""Yes," said Professor McGonagall. "And I don't suppose you're going totell me why you're here, of all places?""I've come to bring Harry to his aunt and uncle. They're the only familyhe has left now."




10"You don't mean -- you can't mean the people who live here?" criedProfessor McGonagall, jumping to her feet and pointing at number four."Dumbledore -- you can't. I've been watching them all day. You couldn'tfind two people who are less like us. And they've got this son -- I sawhim kicking his mother all the way up the street, screaming for sweets.Harry Potter come and live here!""It's the best place for him," said Dumbledore firmly. "His aunt anduncle will be able to explain everything to him when he's older. I'vewritten them a letter.""A letter?" repeated Professor McGonagall faintly, sitting back down onthe wall. "Really, Dumbledore, you think you can explain all this in aletter? These people will never understand him! He'll be famous -- alegend -- I wouldn't be surprised if today was known as Harry Potter dayin the future -- there will be books written about Harry -- every childin our world will know his name!""Exactly," said Dumbledore, looking very seriously over the top of hishalf-moon glasses. "It would be enough to turn any boy's head. Famousbefore he can walk and talk! Famous for something he won't evenremember! CarA you see how much better off he'll be, growing up awayfrom all that until he's ready to take it?"Professor McGonagall opened her mouth, changed her mind, swallowed, andthen said, "Yes -- yes, you're right, of course. But how is the boygetting here, Dumbledore?" She eyed his cloak suddenly as though shethought he might be hiding Harry underneath it."Hagrid's bringing him.""You think it -- wise -- to trust Hagrid with something as important asthis?"I would trust Hagrid with my life," said Dumbledore."I'm not saying his heart isn't in the right place," said ProfessorMcGonagall grudgingly, "but you can't pretend he's not careless. He doestend to -- what was that?"A low rumbling sound had broken the silence around them. It grewsteadily louder as they looked up and down the street for some sign of a




11headlight; it swelled to a roar as they both looked up at the sky -- anda huge motorcycle fell out of the air and landed on the road in front ofthem.If the motorcycle was huge, it was nothing to the man sitting astrideit. He was almost twice as tall as a normal man and at least five timesas wide. He looked simply too big to be allowed, and so wild - longtangles of bushy black hair and beard hid most of his face, he had handsthe size of trash can lids, and his feet in their leather boots werelike baby dolphins. In his vast, muscular arms he was holding a bundleof blankets."Hagrid," said Dumbledore, sounding relieved. "At last. And where didyou get that motorcycle?""Borrowed it, Professor Dumbledore, sit," said the giant, climbingcarefully off the motorcycle as he spoke. "Young Sirius Black lent it tome. I've got him, sir.""No problems, were there?""No, sir -- house was almost destroyed, but I got him out all rightbefore the Muggles started swarmin' around. He fell asleep as we wasflyin' over Bristol."Dumbledore and Professor McGonagall bent forward over the bundle ofblankets. Inside, just visible, was a baby boy, fast asleep. Under atuft of jet-black hair over his forehead they could see a curiouslyshaped cut, like a bolt of lightning."Is that where -?" whispered Professor McGonagall."Yes," said Dumbledore. "He'll have that scar forever.""Couldn't you do something about it, Dumbledore?""Even if I could, I wouldn't. Scars can come in handy. I have one myselfabove my left knee that is a perfect map of the London Underground. Well-- give him here, Hagrid -- we'd better get this over with."Dumbledore took Harry in his arms and turned toward the Dursleys' house."Could I -- could I say good-bye to him, sir?" asked Hagrid. He bent his




12great, shaggy head over Harry and gave him what must have been a veryscratchy, whiskery kiss. Then, suddenly, Hagrid let out a howl like awounded dog."Shhh!" hissed Professor McGonagall, "you'll wake the Muggles!""S-s-sorry," sobbed Hagrid, taking out a large, spotted handkerchief andburying his face in it. "But I c-c-can't stand it -- Lily an' James dead-- an' poor little Harry off ter live with Muggles -""Yes, yes, it's all very sad, but get a grip on yourself, Hagrid, orwe'll be found," Professor McGonagall whispered, patting Hagrid gingerlyon the arm as Dumbledore stepped over the low garden wall and walked tothe front door. He laid Harry gently on the doorstep, took a letter outof his cloak, tucked it inside Harry's blankets, and then came back tothe other two. For a full minute the three of them stood and looked atthe little bundle; Hagrid's shoulders shook, Professor McGonagallblinked furiously, and the twinkling light that usually shone fromDumbledore's eyes seemed to have gone out."Well," said Dumbledore finally, "that's that. We've no business stayinghere. We may as well go and join the celebrations.""Yeah," said Hagrid in a very muffled voice, "I'll be takin' Sirius hisbike back. G'night, Professor McGonagall -- Professor Dumbledore, sir."Wiping his streaming eyes on his jacket sleeve, Hagrid swung himselfonto the motorcycle and kicked the engine into life; with a roar it roseinto the air and off into the night."I shall see you soon, I expect, Professor McGonagall," said Dumbledore,nodding to her. Professor McGonagall blew her nose in reply.Dumbledore turned and walked back down the street. On the corner hestopped and took out the silver Put-Outer. He clicked it once, andtwelve balls of light sped back to their street lamps so that PrivetDrive glowed suddenly orange and he could make out a tabby cat slinkingaround the corner at the other end of the street. He could just see thebundle of blankets on the step of number four."Good luck, Harry," he murmured. He turned on his heel and with a swishof his cloak, he was gone.




13A breeze ruffled the neat hedges of Privet Drive, which lay silent andtidy under the inky sky, the very last place you would expectastonishing things to happen. Harry Potter rolled over inside hisblankets without waking up. One small hand closed on the letter besidehim and he slept on, not knowing he was special, not knowing he wasfamous, not knowing he would be woken in a few hours' time by Mrs.Dursley's scream as she opened the front door to put out the milkbottles, nor that he would spend the next few weeks being prodded andpinched by his cousin Dudley... He couldn't know that at this verymoment, people meeting in secret all over the country were holding uptheir glasses and saying in hushed voices: "To Harry Potter -- the boywho lived!"CHAPTER TWOTHE VANISHING GLASSNearly ten years had passed since the Dursleys had woken up to findtheir nephew on the front step, but Privet Drive had hardly changed atall. The sun rose on the same tidy front gardens and lit up the brassnumber four on the Dursleys' front door; it crept into their livingroom, which was almost exactly the same as it had been on the night whenMr. Dursley had seen that fateful news report about the owls. Only thephotographs on the mantelpiece really showed how much time had passed.Ten years ago, there had been lots of pictures of what looked like alarge pink beach ball wearing different-colored bonnets -- but DudleyDursley was no longer a baby, and now the photographs showed a largeblond boy riding his first bicycle, on a carousel at the fair, playing acomputer game with his father, being hugged and kissed by his mother.The room held no sign at all that another boy lived in the house, too.Yet Harry Potter was still there, asleep at the moment, but not forlong. His Aunt Petunia was awake and it was her shrill voice that madethe first noise of the day."Up! Get up! Now!"Harry woke with a start. His aunt rapped on the door again."Up!" she screeched. Harry heard her walking toward the kitchen and thenthe sound of the frying pan being put on the stove. He rolled onto hisback and tried to remember the dream he had been having. It had been a




14good one. There had been a flying motorcycle in it. He had a funnyfeeling he'd had the same dream before.His aunt was back outside the door."Are you up yet?" she demanded."Nearly," said Harry."Well, get a move on, I want you to look after the bacon. And don't youdare let it burn, I want everything perfect on Duddy's birthday."Harry groaned."What did you say?" his aunt snapped through the door."Nothing, nothing..."Dudley's birthday -- how could he have forgotten? Harry got slowly outof bed and started looking for socks. He found a pair under his bed and,after pulling a spider off one of them, put them on. Harry was used tospiders, because the cupboard under the stairs was full of them, andthat was where he slept.When he was dressed he went down the hall into the kitchen. The tablewas almost hidden beneath all Dudley's birthday presents. It looked asthough Dudley had gotten the new computer he wanted, not to mention thesecond television and the racing bike. Exactly why Dudley wanted aracing bike was a mystery to Harry, as Dudley was very fat and hatedexercise -- unless of course it involved punching somebody. Dudley'sfavorite punching bag was Harry, but he couldn't often catch him. Harrydidn't look it, but he was very fast.Perhaps it had something to do with living in a dark cupboard, but Harryhad always been small and skinny for his age. He looked even smaller andskinnier than he really was because all he had to wear were old clothesof Dudley's, and Dudley was about four times bigger than he was. Harryhad a thin face, knobbly knees, black hair, and bright green eyes. Hewore round glasses held together with a lot of Scotch tape because ofall the times Dudley had punched him on the nose. The only thing Harryliked about his own appearance was a very thin scar on his forehead thatwas shaped like a bolt of lightning. He had had it as long as he couldremember, and the first question he could ever remember asking his Aunt




15Petunia was how he had gotten it."In the car crash when your parents died," she had said. "And don't askquestions."Don't ask questions -- that was the first rule for a quiet life with theDursleys.Uncle Vernon entered the kitchen as Harry was turning over the bacon."Comb your hair!" he barked, by way of a morning greeting.About once a week, Uncle Vernon looked over the top of his newspaper andshouted that Harry needed a haircut. Harry must have had more haircutsthan the rest of the boys in his class puttogether, but it made no difference, his hair simply grew that way --all over the place.Harry was frying eggs by the time Dudley arrived in the kitchen with hismother. Dudley looked a lot like Uncle Vernon. He had a large pink face,not much neck, small, watery blue eyes, and thick blond hair that laysmoothly on his thick, fat head. Aunt Petunia often said that Dudleylooked like a baby angel -- Harry often said that Dudley looked like apig in a wig.Harry put the plates of egg and bacon on the table, which was difficultas there wasn't much room. Dudley, meanwhile, was counting his presents.His face fell."Thirty-six," he said, looking up at his mother and father. "That's twoless than last year.""Darling, you haven't counted Auntie Marge's present, see, it's hereunder this big one from Mommy and Daddy.""All right, thirty-seven then," said Dudley, going red in the face.Harry, who could see a huge Dudley tantrum coming on, began wolfing downhis bacon as fast as possible in case Dudley turned the table over.Aunt Petunia obviously scented danger, too, because she said quickly,"And we'll buy you another two presents while we're out today. How'sthat, popkin? Two more presents. Is that all right''




16Dudley thought for a moment. It looked like hard work. Finally he saidslowly, "So I'll have thirty ... thirty...""Thirty-nine, sweetums," said Aunt Petunia."Oh." Dudley sat down heavily and grabbed the nearest parcel. "All rightthen."Uncle Vernon chuckled. "Little tyke wants his money's worth, just likehis father. 'Atta boy, Dudley!" He ruffled Dudley's hair.At that moment the telephone rang and Aunt Petunia went to answer itwhile Harry and Uncle Vernon watched Dudley unwrap the racing bike, avideo camera, a remote control airplane, sixteen new computer games, anda VCR. He was ripping the paper off a gold wristwatch when Aunt Petuniacame back from the telephone looking both angry and worried."Bad news, Vernon," she said. "Mrs. Figg's broken her leg. She can'ttake him." She jerked her head in Harry's direction.Dudley's mouth fell open in horror, but Harry's heart gave a leap. Everyyear on Dudley's birthday, his parents took him and a friend out for theday, to adventure parks, hamburger restaurants, or the movies. Everyyear, Harry was left behind with Mrs. Figg, a mad old lady who lived twostreets away. Harry hated it there. The whole house smelled of cabbageand Mrs. Figg made him look at photographs of all the cats she'd everowned."Now what?" said Aunt Petunia, looking furiously at Harry as though he'dplanned this. Harry knew he ought to feel sorry that Mrs. Figg hadbroken her leg, but it wasn't easy when he reminded himself it would bea whole year before he had to look at Tibbles, Snowy, Mr. Paws, andTufty again."We could phone Marge," Uncle Vernon suggested."Don't be silly, Vernon, she hates the boy."The Dursleys often spoke about Harry like this, as though he wasn'tthere -- or rather, as though he was something very nasty that couldn'tunderstand them, like a slug.




17"What about what's-her-name, your friend -- Yvonne?""On vacation in Majorca," snapped Aunt Petunia."You could just leave me here," Harry put in hopefully (he'd be able towatch what he wanted on television for a change and maybe even have a goon Dudley's computer).Aunt Petunia looked as though she'd just swallowed a lemon."And come back and find the house in ruins?" she snarled."I won't blow up the house," said Harry, but they weren't listening."I suppose we could take him to the zoo," said Aunt Petunia slowly, "...and leave him in the car....""That car's new, he's not sitting in it alone...."Dudley began to cry loudly. In fact, he wasn't really crying -- it hadbeen years since he'd really cried -- but he knew that if he screwed uphis face and wailed, his mother would give him anything he wanted."Dinky Duddydums, don't cry, Mummy won't let him spoil your specialday!" she cried, flinging her arms around him."I... don't... want... him... t-t-to come!" Dudley yelled between huge,pretend sobs. "He always sp- spoils everything!" He shot Harry a nastygrin through the gap in his mother's arms.Just then, the doorbell rang -- "Oh, good Lord, they're here!" said AuntPetunia frantically -- and a moment later, Dudley's best friend, PiersPolkiss, walked in with his mother. Piers was a scrawny boy with a facelike a rat. He was usually the one who held people's arms behind theirbacks while Dudley hit them. Dudley stopped pretending to cry at once.Half an hour later, Harry, who couldn't believe his luck, was sitting inthe back of the Dursleys' car with Piers and Dudley, on the way to thezoo for the first time in his life. His aunt and uncle hadn't been ableto think of anything else to do with him, but before they'd left, UncleVernon had taken Harry aside."I'm warning you," he had said, putting his large purple face right up




18close to Harry's, "I'm warning you now, boy -- any funny business,anything at all -- and you'll be in that cupboard from now untilChristmas.""I'm not going to do anything," said Harry, "honestly..But Uncle Vernon didn't believe him. No one ever did.The problem was, strange things often happened around Harry and it wasjust no good telling the Dursleys he didn't make them happen.Once, Aunt Petunia, tired of Harry coming back from the barbers lookingas though he hadn't been at all, had taken a pair of kitchen scissorsand cut his hair so short he was almost bald except for his bangs, whichshe left "to hide that horrible scar." Dudley had laughed himself sillyat Harry, who spent a sleepless night imagining school the next day,where he was already laughed at for his baggy clothes and taped glasses.Next morning, however, he had gotten up to find his hair exactly as ithad been before Aunt Petunia had sheared it off He had been given a weekin his cupboard for this, even though he had tried to explain that hecouldn't explain how it had grown back so quickly.Another time, Aunt Petunia had been trying to force him into a revoltingold sweater of Dudley's (brown with orange puff balls) -- The harder shetried to pull it over his head, the smaller it seemed to become, untilfinally it might have fitted a hand puppet, but certainly wouldn't fitHarry. Aunt Petunia had decided it must have shrunk in the wash and, tohis great relief, Harry wasn't punished.On the other hand, he'd gotten into terrible trouble for being found onthe roof of the school kitchens. Dudley's gang had been chasing him asusual when, as much to Harry's surprise as anyone else's, there he wassitting on the chimney. The Dursleys had received a very angry letterfrom Harry's headmistress telling them Harry had been climbing schoolbuildings. But all he'd tried to do (as he shouted at Uncle Vernonthrough the locked door of his cupboard) was jump behind the big trashcans outside the kitchen doors. Harry supposed that the wind must havecaught him in mid- jump.But today, nothing was going to go wrong. It was even worth being withDudley and Piers to be spending the day somewhere that wasn't school,his cupboard, or Mrs. Figg's cabbage-smelling living room.




19While he drove, Uncle Vernon complained to Aunt Petunia. He liked tocomplain about things: people at work, Harry, the council, Harry, thebank, and Harry were just a few of his favorite subjects. This morning,it was motorcycles."... roaring along like maniacs, the young hoodlums," he said, as amotorcycle overtook them.I had a dream about a motorcycle," said Harry, remembering suddenly. "Itwas flying."Uncle Vernon nearly crashed into the car in front. He turned rightaround in his seat and yelled at Harry, his face like a gigantic beetwith a mustache: "MOTORCYCLES DON'T FLY!"Dudley and Piers sniggered.I know they don't," said Harry. "It was only a dream."But he wished he hadn't said anything. If there was one thing theDursleys hated even more than his asking questions, it was his talkingabout anything acting in a way it shouldn't, no matter if it was in adream or even a cartoon -- they seemed to think he might get dangerousideas.It was a very sunny Saturday and the zoo was crowded with families. TheDursleys bought Dudley and Piers large chocolate ice creams at theentrance and then, because the smiling lady in the van had asked Harrywhat he wanted before they could hurry him away, they bought him a cheaplemon ice pop. It wasn't bad, either, Harry thought, licking it as theywatched a gorilla scratching its head who looked remarkably like Dudley,except that it wasn't blond.Harry had the best morning he'd had in a long time. He was careful towalk a little way apart from the Dursleys so that Dudley and Piers, whowere starting to get bored with the animals by lunchtime, wouldn't fallback on their favorite hobby of hitting him. They ate in the zoorestaurant, and when Dudley had a tantrum because his knickerbockerglory didn't have enough ice cream on top, Uncle Vernon bought himanother one and Harry was allowed to finish the first.Harry felt, afterward, that he should have known it was all too good tolast.




20After lunch they went to the reptile house. It was cool and dark inthere, with lit windows all along the walls. Behind the glass, all sortsof lizards and snakes were crawling and slithering over bits of wood andstone. Dudley and Piers wanted to see huge, poisonous cobras and thick,man-crushing pythons. Dudley quickly found the largest snake in theplace. It could have wrapped its body twice around Uncle Vernon's carand crushed it into a trash can -- but at the moment it didn't look inthe mood. In fact, it was fast asleep.Dudley stood with his nose pressed against the glass, staring at theglistening brown coils."Make it move," he whined at his father. Uncle Vernon tapped on theglass, but the snake didn't budge."Do it again," Dudley ordered. Uncle Vernon rapped the glass smartlywith his knuckles, but the snake just snoozed on."This is boring," Dudley moaned. He shuffled away.Harry moved in front of the tank and looked intently at the snake. Hewouldn't have been surprised if it had died of boredom itself -- nocompany except stupid people drumming their fingers on the glass tryingto disturb it all day long. It was worse than having a cupboard as abedroom, where the only visitor was Aunt Petunia hammering on the doorto wake you up; at least he got to visit the rest of the house.The snake suddenly opened its beady eyes. Slowly, very slowly, it raisedits head until its eyes were on a level with Harry's.It winked.Harry stared. Then he looked quickly around to see if anyone waswatching. They weren't. He looked back at the snake and winked, too.The snake jerked its head toward Uncle Vernon and Dudley, then raisedits eyes to the ceiling. It gave Harry a look that said quite plainly:"I get that all the time."I know," Harry murmured through the glass, though he wasn't sure thesnake could hear him. "It must be really annoying."




21The snake nodded vigorously."Where do you come from, anyway?" Harry asked.The snake jabbed its tail at a little sign next to the glass. Harrypeered at it.Boa Constrictor, Brazil."Was it nice there?"The boa constrictor jabbed its tail at the sign again and Harry read on:This specimen was bred in the zoo. "Oh, I see -- so you've never been toBrazil?"As the snake shook its head, a deafening shout behind Harry made both ofthem jump."DUDLEY! MR. DURSLEY! COME AND LOOK AT THIS SNAKE! YOUWON'T BELIEVEWHAT IT'S DOING!"Dudley came waddling toward them as fast as he could."Out of the way, you," he said, punching Harry in the ribs. Caught bysurprise, Harry fell hard on the concrete floor. What came next happenedso fast no one saw how it happened -- one second, Piers and Dudley wereleaning right up close to the glass, the next, they had leapt back withhowls of horror.Harry sat up and gasped; the glass front of the boa constrictor's tankhad vanished. The great snake was uncoiling itself rapidly, slitheringout onto the floor. People throughout the reptile house screamed andstarted running for the exits.As the snake slid swiftly past him, Harry could have sworn a low,hissing voice said, "Brazil, here I come.... Thanksss, amigo."The keeper of the reptile house was in shock."But the glass," he kept saying, "where did the glass go?"




22The zoo director himself made Aunt Petunia a cup of strong, sweet teawhile he apologized over and over again. Piers and Dudley could onlygibber. As far as Harry had seen, the snake hadn't done anything exceptsnap playfully at their heels as it passed, but by the time they wereall back in Uncle Vernon's car, Dudley was telling them how it hadnearly bitten off his leg, while Piers was swearing it had tried tosqueeze him to death. But worst of all, for Harry at least, was Pierscalming down enough to say, "Harry was talking to it, weren't you,Harry?"Uncle Vernon waited until Piers was safely out of the house beforestarting on Harry. He was so angry he could hardly speak. He managed tosay, "Go -- cupboard -- stay -- no meals," before he collapsed into achair, and Aunt Petunia had to run and get him a large brandy.Harry lay in his dark cupboard much later, wishing he had a watch. Hedidn't know what time it was and he couldn't be sure the Dursleys wereasleep yet. Until they were, he couldn't risk sneaking to the kitchenfor some food.He'd lived with the Dursleys almost ten years, ten miserable years, aslong as he could remember, ever since he'd been a baby and his parentshad died in that car crash. He couldn't remember being in the car whenhis parents had died. Sometimes, when he strained his memory during longhours in his cupboard, he came up with a strange vision: a blindingflash of green light and a burn- ing pain on his forehead. This, hesupposed, was the crash, though he couldn't imagine where all the greenlight came from. He couldn't remember his parents at all. His aunt anduncle never spoke about them, and of course he was forbidden to askquestions. There were no photographs of them in the house.When he had been younger, Harry had dreamed and dreamed of some unknownrelation coming to take him away, but it had never happened; theDursleys were his only family. Yet sometimes he thought (or maybe hoped)that strangers in the street seemed to know him. Very strange strangersthey were, too. A tiny man in a violet top hat had bowed to him oncewhile out shopping with Aunt Petunia and Dudley. After asking Harryfuriously if he knew the man, Aunt Petunia had rushed them out of theshop without buying anything. A wild-looking old woman dressed all ingreen had waved merrily at him once on a bus. A bald man in a very longpurple coat had actually shaken his hand in the street the other day andthen walked away without a word. The weirdest thing about all thesepeople was the way they seemed to vanish the second Harry tried to get a




23closer look.At school, Harry had no one. Everybody knew that Dudley's gang hatedthat odd Harry Potter in his baggy old clothes and broken glasses, andnobody liked to disagree with Dudley's gang.CHAPTER THREETHE LETTERS FROM NO ONEThe escape of the Brazilian boa constrictor earned Harry hislongest-ever punishment. By the time he was allowed out of his cupboardagain, the summer holidays had started and Dudley had already broken hisnew video camera, crashed his remote control airplane, and, first timeout on his racing bike, knocked down old Mrs. Figg as she crossed PrivetDrive on her crutches.Harry was glad school was over, but there was no escaping Dudley's gang,who visited the house every single day. Piers, Dennis, Malcolm, andGordon were all big and stupid, but as Dudley was the biggest andstupidest of the lot, he was the leader. The rest of them were all quitehappy to join in Dudley's favorite sport: Harry Hunting.This was why Harry spent as much time as possible out of the house,wandering around and thinking about the end of the holidays, where hecould see a tiny ray of hope. When September came he would be going offto secondary school and, for the first time in his life, he wouldn't bewith Dudley. Dudley had been accepted at Uncle Vernon's old privateschool, Smeltings. Piers Polkiss was going there too. Harry, on theother hand, was going to Stonewall High, the local public school. Dudleythought this was very funny."They stuff people's heads down the toilet the first day at Stonewall,"he told Harry. "Want to come upstairs and practice?""No, thanks," said Harry. "The poor toilet's never had anything ashorrible as your head down it -- it might be sick." Then he ran, beforeDudley could work out what he'd said.One day in July, Aunt Petunia took Dudley to London to buy his Smeltingsuniform, leaving Harry at Mrs. Figg's. Mrs. Figg wasn 't as bad asusual. It turned out she'd broken her leg tripping over one of her cats,




24and she didn't seem quite as fond of them as before. She let Harry watchtelevision and gave him a bit of chocolate cake that tasted as thoughshe'd had it for several years.That evening, Dudley paraded around the living room for the family inhis brand-new uniform. Smeltings' boys wore maroon tailcoats, orangeknickerbockers, and flat straw hats called boaters. They also carriedknobbly sticks, used for hitting each other while the teachers weren'tlooking. This was supposed to be good training for later life.As he looked at Dudley in his new knickerbockers, Uncle Vernon saidgruffly that it was the proudest moment of his life. Aunt Petunia burstinto tears and said she couldn't believe it was her Ickle Dudleykins, helooked so handsome and grown-up. Harry didn't trust himself to speak. Hethought two of his ribs might already have cracked from trying not tolaugh.There was a horrible smell in the kitchen the next morning when Harrywent in for breakfast. It seemed to be coming from a large metal tub inthe sink. He went to have a look. The tub was full of what looked likedirty rags swimming in gray water."What's this?" he asked Aunt Petunia. Her lips tightened as they alwaysdid if he dared to ask a question."Your new school uniform," she said.Harry looked in the bowl again."Oh," he said, "I didn't realize it had to be so wet.""DotA be stupid," snapped Aunt Petunia. "I'm dyeing some of Dudley's oldthings gray for you. It'll look just like everyone else's when I'vefinished."Harry seriously doubted this, but thought it best not to argue. He satdown at the table and tried not to think about how he was going to lookon his first day at Stonewall High -- like he was wearing bits of oldelephant skin, probably.Dudley and Uncle Vernon came in, both with wrinkled noses because of thesmell from Harry's new uniform. Uncle Vernon opened his newspaper asusual and Dudley banged his Smelting stick, which he carried everywhere,




25on the table.They heard the click of the mail slot and flop of letters on thedoormat."Get the mail, Dudley," said Uncle Vernon from behind his paper."Make Harry get it.""Get the mail, Harry.""Make Dudley get it.""Poke him with your Smelting stick, Dudley."Harry dodged the Smelting stick and went to get the mail. Three thingslay on the doormat: a postcard from Uncle Vernon's sister Marge, who wasvacationing on the Isle of Wight, a brown envelope that looked like abill, and -- a letter for Harry.Harry picked it up and stared at it, his heart twanging like a giantelastic band. No one, ever, in his whole life, had written to him. Whowould? He had no friends, no other relatives -- he didn't belong to thelibrary, so he'd never even got rude notes asking for books back. Yethere it was, a letter, addressed so plainly there could be no mistake:Mr. H. PotterThe Cupboard under the Stairs4 Privet DriveLittle WhingingSurreyThe envelope was thick and heavy, made of yellowish parchment, and theaddress was written in emerald-green ink. There was no stamp.Turning the envelope over, his hand trembling, Harry saw a purple waxseal bearing a coat of arms; a lion, an eagle, a badger, and a snakesurrounding a large letter H.




26"Hurry up, boy!" shouted Uncle Vernon from the kitchen. "What are youdoing, checking for letter bombs?" He chuckled at his own joke.Harry went back to the kitchen, still staring at his letter. He handedUncle Vernon the bill and the postcard, sat down, and slowly began toopen the yellow envelope.Uncle Vernon ripped open the bill, snorted in disgust, and flipped overthe postcard."Marge's ill," he informed Aunt Petunia. "Ate a funny whelk. --.""Dad!" said Dudley suddenly. "Dad, Harry's got something!"Harry was on the point of unfolding his letter, which was written on thesame heavy parchment as the envelope, when it was jerked sharply out ofhis hand by Uncle Vernon."That's mine!" said Harry, trying to snatch it back."Who'd be writing to you?" sneered Uncle Vernon, shaking the letter openwith one hand and glancing at it. His face went from red to green fasterthan a set of traffic lights. And it didn't stop there. Within secondsit was the grayish white of old porridge."P-P-Petunia!" he gasped.Dudley tried to grab the letter to read it, but Uncle Vernon held ithigh out of his reach. Aunt Petunia took it curiously and read the firstline. For a moment it looked as though she might faint. She clutched herthroat and made a choking noise."Vernon! Oh my goodness -- Vernon!"They stared at each other, seeming to have forgotten that Harry andDudley were still in the room. Dudley wasn't used to being ignored. Hegave his father a sharp tap on the head with his Smelting stick."I want to read that letter," he said loudly. want to read it," saidHarry furiously, "as it's mine.""Get out, both of you," croaked Uncle Vernon, stuffing the letter backinside its envelope.




27Harry didn't move.I WANT MY LETTER!" he shouted."Let me see it!" demanded Dudley."OUT!" roared Uncle Vernon, and he took both Harry and Dudley by thescruffs of their necks and threw them into the hall, slamming thekitchen door behind them. Harry and Dudley promptly had a furious butsilent fight over who would listen at the keyhole; Dudley won, so Harry,his glasses dangling from one ear, lay flat on his stomach to listen atthe crack between door and floor."Vernon," Aunt Petunia was saying in a quivering voice, "look at theaddress -- how could they possibly know where he sleeps? You don't thinkthey're watching the house?""Watching -- spying -- might be following us," muttered Uncle Vernonwildly."But what should we do, Vernon? Should we write back? Tell them we don'twant --"Harry could see Uncle Vernon's shiny black shoes pacing up and down thekitchen."No," he said finally. "No, we'll ignore it. If they don't get ananswer... Yes, that's best... we won't do anything...."But --""I'm not having one in the house, Petunia! Didn't we swear when we tookhim in we'd stamp out that dangerous nonsense?"That evening when he got back from work, Uncle Vernon did something he'dnever done before; he visited Harry in his cupboard."Where's my letter?" said Harry, the moment Uncle Vernon had squeezedthrough the door. "Who's writing to me?""No one. it was addressed to you by mistake," said Uncle Vernon shortly."I have burned it."




28"It was not a mistake," said Harry angrily, "it had my cupboard on it.""SILENCE!" yelled Uncle Vernon, and a couple of spiders fell from theceiling. He took a few deep breaths and then forced his face into asmile, which looked quite painful."Er -- yes, Harry -- about this cupboard. Your aunt and I have beenthinking... you're really getting a bit big for it... we think it mightbe nice if you moved into Dudley's second bedroom."Why?" said Harry."Don't ask questions!" snapped his uncle. "Take this stuff upstairs,now."The Dursleys' house had four bedrooms: one for Uncle Vernon and AuntPetunia, one for visitors (usually Uncle Vernon's sister, Marge), onewhere Dudley slept, and one where Dudley kept all the toys and thingsthat wouldn't fit into his first bedroom. It only took Harry one tripupstairs to move everything he owned from the cupboard to this room. Hesat down on the bed and stared around him. Nearly everything in here wasbroken. The month-old video camera was lying on top of a small, workingtank Dudley had once driven over the next door neighbor's dog; in thecorner was Dudley's first-ever television set, which he'd put his footthrough when his favorite program had been canceled; there was a largebirdcage, which had once held a parrot that Dudley had swapped at schoolfor a real air rifle, which was up on a shelf with the end all bentbecause Dudley had sat on it. Other shelves were full of books. Theywere the only things in the room that looked as though they'd never beentouched.From downstairs came the sound of Dudley bawling at his mother, I don'twant him in there... I need that room... make him get out...."Harry sighed and stretched out on the bed. Yesterday he'd have givenanything to be up here. Today he'd rather be back in his cupboard withthat letter than up here without it.Next morning at breakfast, everyone was rather quiet. Dudley was inshock. He'd screamed, whacked his father with his Smelting stick, beensick on purpose, kicked his mother, and thrown his tortoise through thegreenhouse roof, and he still didn't have his room back. Harry was




29thinking about this time yesterday and bitterly wishing he'd opened theletter in the hall. Uncle Vernon and Aunt Petunia kept looking at eachother darkly.When the mail arrived, Uncle Vernon, who seemed to be trying to be niceto Harry, made Dudley go and get it. They heard him banging things withhis Smelting stick all the way down the hall. Then he shouted, "There'sanother one! 'Mr. H. Potter, The Smallest Bedroom, 4 Privet Drive --'"With a strangled cry, Uncle Vernon leapt from his seat and ran down thehall, Harry right behind him. Uncle Vernon had to wrestle Dudley to theground to get the letter from him, which was made difficult by the factthat Harry had grabbed Uncle Vernon around the neck from behind. After aminute of confused fighting, in which everyone got hit a lot by theSmelting stick, Uncle Vernon straightened up, gasping for breath, withHarry's letter clutched in his hand."Go to your cupboard -- I mean, your bedroom," he wheezed at Harry."Dudley -- go -- just go."Harry walked round and round his new room. Someone knew he had moved outof his cupboard and they seemed to know he hadn't received his firstletter. Surely that meant they'd try again? And this time he'd make surethey didn't fail. He had a plan.The repaired alarm clock rang at six o'clock the next morning. Harryturned it off quickly and dressed silently. He mustn't wake theDursleys. He stole downstairs without turning on any of the lights.He was going to wait for the postman on the corner of Privet Drive andget the letters for number four first. His heart hammered as he creptacross the dark hall toward the front door --Harry leapt into the air; he'd trodden on something big and squashy onthe doormat -- something alive!Lights clicked on upstairs and to his horror Harry realized that thebig, squashy something had been his uncle's face. Uncle Vernon had beenlying at the foot of the front door in a sleeping bag, clearly makingsure that Harry didn't do exactly what he'd been trying to do. Heshouted at Harry for about half an hour and then told him to go and makea cup of tea. Harry shuffled miserably off into the kitchen and by thetime he got back, the mail had arrived, right into Uncle Vernon's lap.




30Harry could see three letters addressed in green ink.I want --" he began, but Uncle Vernon was tearing the letters intopieces before his eyes. Uncle Vernon didnt go to work that day. Hestayed at home and nailed up the mail slot."See," he explained to Aunt Petunia through a mouthful of nails, "ifthey can't deliver them they'll just give up.""I'm not sure that'll work, Vernon.""Oh, these people's minds work in strange ways, Petunia, they're notlike you and me," said Uncle Vernon, trying to knock in a nail with thepiece of fruitcake Aunt Petunia had just brought him.On Friday, no less than twelve letters arrived for Harry. As theycouldn't go through the mail slot they had been pushed under the door,slotted through the sides, and a few even forced through the smallwindow in the downstairs bathroom.Uncle Vernon stayed at home again. After burning all the letters, he gotout a hammer and nails and boarded up the cracks around the front andback doors so no one could go out. He hummed "Tiptoe Through the Tulips"as he worked, and jumped at small noises.On Saturday, things began to get out of hand. Twenty-four letters toHarry found their way into the house, rolled up and hidden inside eachof the two dozen eggs that their very confused milkman had handed AuntPetunia through the living room window. While Uncle Vernon made furioustelephone calls to the post office and the dairy trying to find someoneto complain to, Aunt Petunia shredded the letters in her food processor."Who on earth wants to talk to you this badly?" Dudley asked Harry inamazement.On Sunday morning, Uncle Vernon sat down at the breakfast table lookingtired and rather ill, but happy."No post on Sundays," he reminded them cheerfully as he spread marmaladeon his newspapers, "no damn letters today --"Something came whizzing down the kitchen chimney as he spoke and caughthim sharply on the back of the head. Next moment, thirty or forty




31letters came pelting out of the fireplace like bullets. The Dursleysducked, but Harry leapt into the air trying to catch one."Out! OUT!"Uncle Vernon seized Harry around the waist and threw him into the hall.When Aunt Petunia and Dudley had run out with their arms over theirfaces, Uncle Vernon slammed the door shut. They could hear the lettersstill streaming into the room, bouncing off the walls and floor."That does it," said Uncle Vernon, trying to speak calmly but pullinggreat tufts out of his mustache at the same time. I want you all backhere in five minutes ready to leave. We're going away. Just pack someclothes. No arguments!"He looked so dangerous with half his mustache missing that no one daredargue. Ten minutes later they had wrenched their way through theboarded-up doors and were in the car, speeding toward the highway.Dudley was sniffling in the back seat; his father had hit him round thehead for holding them up while he tried to pack his television, VCR, andcomputer in his sports bag.They drove. And they drove. Even Aunt Petunia didn't dare ask where theywere going. Every now and then Uncle Vernon would take a sharp turn anddrive in the opposite direction for a while. "Shake'em off... shake 'emoff," he would mutter whenever he did this.They didn't stop to eat or drink all day. By nightfall Dudley washowling. He'd never had such a bad day in his life. He was hungry, he'dmissed five television programs he'd wanted to see, and he'd never goneso long without blowing up an alien on his computer.Uncle Vernon stopped at last outside a gloomy-looking hotel on theoutskirts of a big city. Dudley and Harry shared a room with twin bedsand damp, musty sheets. Dudley snored but Harry stayed awake, sitting onthe windowsill, staring down at the lights of passing cars andwondering....They ate stale cornflakes and cold tinned tomatoes on toast forbreakfast the next day. They had just finished when the owner of thehotel came over to their table."'Scuse me, but is one of you Mr. H. Potter? Only I got about an 'undred




32of these at the front desk."She held up a letter so they could read the green ink address:Mr. H. PotterRoom 17Railview HotelCokeworthHarry made a grab for the letter but Uncle Vernon knocked his hand outof the way. The woman stared."I'll take them," said Uncle Vernon, standing up quickly and followingher from the dining room.Wouldn't it be better just to go home, dear?" Aunt Petunia suggestedtimidly, hours later, but Uncle Vernon didn't seem to hear her. Exactlywhat he was looking for, none of them knew. He drove them into themiddle of a forest, got out, looked around, shook his head, got back inthe car, and off they went again. The same thing happened in the middleof a plowed field, halfway across a suspension bridge, and at the top ofa multilevel parking garage."Daddy's gone mad, hasn't he?" Dudley asked Aunt Petunia dully late thatafternoon. Uncle Vernon had parked at the coast, locked them all insidethe car, and disappeared.It started to rain. Great drops beat on the roof of the car. Dud leysniveled."It's Monday," he told his mother. "The Great Humberto's on tonight. Iwant to stay somewhere with a television. "Monday. This reminded Harry of something. If it was Monday -- and youcould usually count on Dudley to know the days the week, because oftelevision -- then tomorrow, Tuesday, was Harry's eleventh birthday. Ofcourse, his birthdays were never exactly fun -- last year, the Dursleyshad given him a coat hanger and a pair of Uncle Vernon's old socks.Still, you weren't eleven every day.




33Uncle Vernon was back and he was smiling. He was also carrying a long,thin package and didn't answer Aunt Petunia when she asked what he'dbought."Found the perfect place!" he said. "Come on! Everyone out!"It was very cold outside the car. Uncle Vernon was pointing at whatlooked like a large rock way out at sea. Perched on top of the rock wasthe most miserable little shack you could imagine. One thing wascertain, there was no television in there."Storm forecast for tonight!" said Uncle Vernon gleefully, clapping hishands together. "And this gentleman's kindly agreed to lend us hisboat!"A toothless old man came ambling up to them, pointing, with a ratherwicked grin, at an old rowboat bobbing in the iron-gray water belowthem."I've already got us some rations," said Uncle Vernon, "so all aboard!"It was freezing in the boat. Icy sea spray and rain crept down theirnecks and a chilly wind whipped their faces. After what seemed likehours they reached the rock, where Uncle Vernon, slipping and sliding,led the way to the broken-down house.The inside was horrible; it smelled strongly of seaweed, the windwhistled through the gaps in the wooden walls, and the fireplace wasdamp and empty. There were only two rooms.Uncle Vernon's rations turned out to be a bag of chips each and fourbananas. He tried to start a fire but the empty chip bags just smokedand shriveled up."Could do with some of those letters now, eh?" he said cheerfully.He was in a very good mood. Obviously he thought nobody stood a chanceof reaching them here in a storm to deliver mail. Harry privatelyagreed, though the thought didn't cheer him up at all.As night fell, the promised storm blew up around them. Spray from thehigh waves splattered the walls of the hut and a fierce wind rattled thefilthy windows. Aunt Petunia found a few moldy blankets in the second




34room and made up a bed for Dudley on the moth-eaten sofa. She and UncleVernon went off to the lumpy bed next door, and Harry was left to findthe softest bit of floor he could and to curl up under the thinnest,most ragged blanket.The storm raged more and more ferociously as the night went on. Harrycouldn't sleep. He shivered and turned over, trying to get comfortable,his stomach rumbling with hunger. Dudley's snores were drowned by thelow rolls of thunder that started near midnight. The lighted dial ofDudley's watch, which was dangling over the edge of the sofa on his fatwrist, told Harry he'd be eleven in ten minutes' time. He lay andwatched his birthday tick nearer, wondering if the Dursleys wouldremember at all, wondering where the letter writer was now.Five minutes to go. Harry heard something creak outside. He hoped theroof wasn't going to fall in, although he might be warmer if it did.Four minutes to go. Maybe the house in Privet Drive would be so full ofletters when they got back that he'd be able to steal one somehow.Three minutes to go. Was that the sea, slapping hard on the rock likethat? And (two minutes to go) what was that funny crunching noise? Wasthe rock crumbling into the sea?One minute to go and he'd be eleven. Thirty seconds... twenty ... ten...nine -- maybe he'd wake Dudley up, just to annoy him -- three... two...one...BOOM.The whole shack shivered and Harry sat bolt upright, staring at thedoor. Someone was outside, knocking to come in.CHAPTER FOURTHE KEEPER OF THE KEYSBOOM. They knocked again. Dudley jerked awake. "Where's the cannon?" hesaid stupidly.There was a crash behind them and Uncle Vernon came skidding into theroom. He was holding a rifle in his hands -- now they knew what had beenin the long, thin package he had brought with them.




35"Who's there?" he shouted. "I warn you -- I'm armed!"There was a pause. Then --SMASH!The door was hit with such force that it swung clean off its hinges andwith a deafening crash landed flat on the floor.A giant of a man was standing in the doorway. His face was almostcompletely hidden by a long, shaggy mane of hair and a wild, tangledbeard, but you could make out his eyes, glinting like black beetlesunder all the hair.The giant squeezed his way into the hut, stooping so that his head justbrushed the ceiling. He bent down, picked up the door, and fitted iteasily back into its frame. The noise of the storm outside dropped alittle. He turned to look at them all."Couldn't make us a cup o' tea, could yeh? It's not been an easyjourney..."He strode over to the sofa where Dudley sat frozen with fear."Budge up, yeh great lump," said the stranger.Dudley squeaked and ran to hide behind his mother, who was crouching,terrified, behind Uncle Vernon."An' here's Harry!" said the giant.Harry looked up into the fierce, wild, shadowy face and saw that thebeetle eyes were crinkled in a smile."Las' time I saw you, you was only a baby," said the giant. "Yeh look alot like yet dad, but yeh've got yet mom's eyes."Uncle Vernon made a funny rasping noise.I demand that you leave at once, sit!" he said. "You are breaking andentering!"




36"Ah, shut up, Dursley, yeh great prune," said the giant; he reached overthe back of the sofa, jerked the gun out of Uncle Vernon's hands, bentit into a knot as easily as if it had been made of rubber, and threw itinto a corner of the room.Uncle Vernon made another funny noise, like a mouse being trodden on."Anyway -- Harry," said the giant, turning his back on the Dursleys, "avery happy birthday to yeh. Got summat fer yeh here -- I mighta sat onit at some point, but it'll taste all right."From an inside pocket of his black overcoat he pulled a slightlysquashed box. Harry opened it with trembling fingers. Inside was alarge, sticky chocolate cake with Happy Birthday Harry written on it ingreen icing.Harry looked up at the giant. He meant to say thank you, but the wordsgot lost on the way to his mouth, and what he said instead was, "Who areyou?"The giant chuckled."True, I haven't introduced meself. Rubeus Hagrid, Keeper of Keys andGrounds at Hogwarts."He held out an enormous hand and shook Harry's whole arm."What about that tea then, eh?" he said, rubbing his hands together."I'd not say no ter summat stronger if yeh've got it, mind."His eyes fell on the empty grate with the shriveled chip bags in it andhe snorted. He bent down over the fireplace; they couldn't see what hewas doing but when he drew back a second later, there was a roaring firethere. It filled the whole damp hut with flickering light and Harry feltthe warmth wash over him as though he'd sunk into a hot bath.The giant sat back down on the sofa, which sagged under his weight, andbegan taking all sorts of things out of the pockets of his coat: acopper kettle, a squashy package of sausages, a poker, a teapot, severalchipped mugs, and a bottle of some amber liquid that he took a swig frombefore starting to make tea. Soon the hut was full of the sound andsmell of sizzling sausage. Nobody said a thing while the giant wasworking, but as he slid the first six fat, juicy, slightly burnt




37sausages from the poker, Dudley fidgeted a little. Uncle Vernon saidsharply, "Don't touch anything he gives you, Dudley."The giant chuckled darkly."Yet great puddin' of a son don' need fattenin' anymore, Dursley, don'worry."He passed the sausages to Harry, who was so hungry he had never tastedanything so wonderful, but he still couldn't take his eyes off thegiant. Finally, as nobody seemed about to explain anything, he said,"I'm sorry, but I still don't really know who you are."The giant took a gulp of tea and wiped his mouth with the back of hishand."Call me Hagrid," he said, "everyone does. An' like I told yeh, I'mKeeper of Keys at Hogwarts -- yeh'll know all about Hogwarts, o' course."Er -- no," said Harry.Hagrid looked shocked."Sorry," Harry said quickly."Sony?" barked Hagrid, turning to stare at the Dursleys, who shrank backinto the shadows. "It' s them as should be sorry! I knew yeh weren'tgettin' yer letters but I never thought yeh wouldn't even know abou'Hogwarts, fer cryin' out loud! Did yeh never wonder where yet parentslearned it all?""All what?" asked Harry."ALL WHAT?" Hagrid thundered. "Now wait jus' one second!"He had leapt to his feet. In his anger he seemed to fill the whole hut.The Dursleys were cowering against the wall."Do you mean ter tell me," he growled at the Dursleys, "that this boy --this boy! -- knows nothin' abou' -- about ANYTHING?"Harry thought this was going a bit far. He had been to school, afterall, and his marks weren't bad.




38"I know some things," he said. "I can, you know, do math and stuff." ButHagrid simply waved his hand and said, "About our world, I mean. Yourworld. My world. Yer parents' world.""What world?"Hagrid looked as if he was about to explode."DURSLEY!" he boomed.Uncle Vernon, who had gone very pale, whispered something that soundedlike "Mimblewimble." Hagrid stared wildly at Harry."But yeh must know about yet mom and dad," he said. "I mean, they'refamous. You're famous.""What? My -- my mom and dad weren't famous, were they?""Yeh don' know... yeh don' know..." Hagrid ran his fingers through hishair, fixing Harry with a bewildered stare."Yeh don' know what yeh are?" he said finally.Uncle Vernon suddenly found his voice."Stop!" he commanded. "Stop right there, sit! I forbid you to tell theboy anything!"A braver man than Vernon Dursley would have quailed under the furiouslook Hagrid now gave him; when Hagrid spoke, his every syllable trembledwith rage."You never told him? Never told him what was in the letter Dumbledoreleft fer him? I was there! I saw Dumbledore leave it, Dursley! An'you've kept it from him all these years?""Kept what from me?" said Harry eagerly."STOP! I FORBID YOU!" yelled Uncle Vernon in panic.Aunt Petunia gave a gasp of horror.




39"Ah, go boil yet heads, both of yeh," said Hagrid. "Harry -- yet awizard."There was silence inside the hut. Only the sea and the whistling windcould be heard."-- a what?" gasped Harry."A wizard, o' course," said Hagrid, sitting back down on the sofa, whichgroaned and sank even lower, "an' a thumpin' good'un, I'd say, onceyeh've been trained up a bit. With a mum an' dad like yours, what elsewould yeh be? An' I reckon it's abou' time yeh read yer letter."Harry stretched out his hand at last to take the yellowish envelope,addressed in emerald green to Mr. H. Potter, The Floor, Hut-on-the-Rock,The Sea. He pulled out the letter and read:HOGWARTS SCHOOL of WITCHCRAFT and WIZARDRYHeadmaster: ALBUS DUMBLEDORE(Order of Merlin, First Class, Grand Sorc., Chf. Warlock, SupremeMugwump, International Confed. of Wizards)Dear Mr. Potter,We are pleased to inform you that you have been accepted at HogwartsSchool of Witchcraft and Wizardry. Please find enclosed a list of allnecessary books and equipment.Term begins on September 1. We await your owl by no later than July 31.Yours sincerely,Minerva McGonagall,Deputy HeadmistressQuestions exploded inside Harry's head like fireworks and he couldn'tdecide which to ask first. After a few minutes he stammered, "What doesit mean, they await my owl?""Gallopin' Gorgons, that reminds me," said Hagrid, clapping a hand tohis forehead with enough force to knock over a cart horse, and from yet




40another pocket inside his overcoat he pulled an owl -- a real, live,rather ruffled-looking owl -- a long quill, and a roll of parchment.With his tongue between his teeth he scribbled a note that Harry couldread upside down:Dear Professor Dumbledore,Given Harry his letter.Taking him to buy his things tomorrow.Weather's horrible. Hope you're Well.HagridHagrid rolled up the note, gave it to the owl, which clamped it in itsbeak, went to the door, and threw the owl out into the storm. Then hecame back and sat down as though this was as normal as talking on thetelephone.Harry realized his mouth was open and closed it quickly."Where was I?" said Hagrid, but at that moment, Uncle Vernon, stillashen-faced but looking very angry, moved into the firelight."He's not going," he said.Hagrid grunted."I'd like ter see a great Muggle like you stop him," he said."A what?" said Harry, interested."A Muggle," said Hagrid, "it's what we call nonmagic folk like thern.An' it's your bad luck you grew up in a family o' the biggest Muggles Iever laid eyes on.""We swore when we took him in we'd put a stop to that rubbish," saidUncle Vernon, "swore we'd stamp it out of him! Wizard indeed!""You knew?" said Harry. "You knew I'm a -- a wizard?""Knew!" shrieked Aunt Petunia suddenly. "Knew! Of course we knew! How




41could you not be, my dratted sister being what she was? Oh, she got aletter just like that and disappeared off to that-that school-and camehome every vacation with her pockets full of frog spawn, turning teacupsinto rats. I was the only one who saw her for what she was -- a freak!But for my mother and father, oh no, it was Lily this and Lily that,they were proud of having a witch in the family!"She stopped to draw a deep breath and then went ranting on. It seemedshe had been wanting to say all this for years."Then she met that Potter at school and they left and got married andhad you, and of course I knew you'd be just the same, just as strange,just as -- as -- abnormal -- and then, if you please, she went and gotherself blown up and we got landed with you!"Harry had gone very white. As soon as he found his voice he said, "Blownup? You told me they died in a car crash!""CAR CRASH!" roared Hagrid, jumping up so angrily that the Dursleysscuttled back to their corner. "How could a car crash kill Lily an'James Potter? It's an outrage! A scandal! Harry Potter not knowin' hisown story when every kid in our world knows his name!" "But why? Whathappened?" Harry asked urgently.The anger faded from Hagrid's face. He looked suddenly anxious."I never expected this," he said, in a low, worried voice. "I had noidea, when Dumbledore told me there might be trouble gettin' hold ofyeh, how much yeh didn't know. Ah, Harry, I don' know if I'm the rightperson ter tell yeh -- but someone 3 s gotta -- yeh can't go off terHogwarts not knowin'."He threw a dirty look at the Dursleys."Well, it's best yeh know as much as I can tell yeh -- mind, I can'ttell yeh everythin', it's a great myst'ry, parts of it...."He sat down, stared into the fire for a few seconds, and then said, "Itbegins, I suppose, with -- with a person called -- but it's incredibleyeh don't know his name, everyone in our world knows --""Who? "




42"Well -- I don' like sayin' the name if I can help it. No one does.""Why not?""Gulpin' gargoyles, Harry, people are still scared. Blimey, this isdifficult. See, there was this wizard who went... bad. As bad as youcould go. Worse. Worse than worse. His name was..."Hagrid gulped, but no words came out."Could you write it down?" Harry suggested."Nah -can't spell it. All right -- Voldemort. " Hagrid shuddered. "Don'make me say it again. Anyway, this -- this wizard, about twenty yearsago now, started lookin' fer followers. Got 'em, too -- some wereafraid, some just wanted a bit o' his power, 'cause he was gettin'himself power, all right. Dark days, Harry. Didn't know who ter trust,didn't dare get friendly with strange wizards or witches... terriblethings happened. He was takin' over. 'Course, some stood up to him --an' he killed 'em. Horribly. One o' the only safe places left wasHogwarts. Reckon Dumbledore's the only one You-Know-Who was afraid of.Didn't dare try takin' the school, not jus' then, anyway."Now, yer mum an' dad were as good a witch an' wizard as I ever knew.Head boy an' girl at Hogwarts in their day! Suppose the myst'ry is whyYou-Know-Who never tried to get 'em on his side before... probably knewthey were too close ter Dumbledore ter want anythin' ter do with theDark Side."Maybe he thought he could persuade 'em... maybe he just wanted 'emoutta the way. All anyone knows is, he turned up in the village whereyou was all living, on Halloween ten years ago. You was just a year old.He came ter yer house an' -- an' --"Hagrid suddenly pulled out a very dirty, spotted handkerchief and blewhis nose with a sound like a foghorn."Sorry," he said. "But it's that sad -- knew yer mum an' dad, an' nicerpeople yeh couldn't find -- anyway...""You-Know-Who killed 'em. An' then -- an' this is the real myst'ry ofthe thing -- he tried to kill you, too. Wanted ter make a clean job ofit, I suppose, or maybe he just liked killin' by then. But he couldn't




43do it. Never wondered how you got that mark on yer forehead? That was noordinary cut. That's what yeh get when a Powerful, evil curse touchesyeh -- took care of yer mum an' dad an' yer house, even -- but it didn'twork on you, an' that's why yer famous, Harry. No one ever lived afterhe decided ter kill 'em, no one except you, an' he'd killed some o' thebest witches an' wizards of the age -- the McKinnons, the Bones, thePrewetts -- an' you was only a baby, an' you lived."Something very painful was going on in Harry's mind. As Hagrid's storycame to a close, he saw again the blinding flash of green light, moreclearly than he had ever remembered it before -- and he rememberedsomething else, for the first time in his life: a high, cold, cruellaugh.Hagrid was watching him sadly."Took yeh from the ruined house myself, on Dumbledore's orders. Broughtyeh ter this lot...""Load of old tosh," said Uncle Vernon. Harry jumped; he had almostforgotten that the Dursleys were there. Uncle Vernon certainly seemed tohave got back his courage. He was glaring at Hagrid and his fists wereclenched."Now, you listen here, boy," he snarled, "I accept there's somethingstrange about you, probably nothing a good beating wouldn't have cured-- and as for all this about your parents, well, they were weirdos, nodenying it, and the world's better off without them in my opinion --asked for all they got, getting mixed up with these wizarding types --just what I expected, always knew they'd come to a sticky end --"But at that moment, Hagrid leapt from the sofa and drew a battered pinkumbrella from inside his coat. Pointing this at Uncle Vernon like asword, he said, "I'm warning you, Dursley -I'm warning you -- one moreword... "In danger of being speared on the end of an umbrella by a bearded giant,Uncle Vernon's courage failed again; he flattened himself against thewall and fell silent."That's better," said Hagrid, breathing heavily and sitting back down onthe sofa, which this time sagged right down to the floor.




44Harry, meanwhile, still had questions to ask, hundreds of them."But what happened to Vol--, sorry -- I mean, You-Know-Who?""Good question, Harry. Disappeared. Vanished. Same night he tried terkill you. Makes yeh even more famous. That's the biggest myst'ry, see...he was gettin' more an' more powerful -- why'd he go?"Some say he died. Codswallop, in my opinion. Dunno if he had enoughhuman left in him to die. Some say he's still out there, bidin' histime, like, but I don' believe it. People who was on his side came backter ours. Some of 'em came outta kinda trances. Don~ reckon theycould've done if he was comin' back."Most of us reckon he's still out there somewhere but lost his powers.Too weak to carry on. 'Cause somethin' about you finished him, Harry.There was somethin' goin' on that night he hadn't counted on -- I dunnowhat it was, no one does -- but somethin' about you stumped him, allright."Hagrid looked at Harry with warmth and respect blazing in his eyes, butHarry, instead of feeling pleased and proud, felt quite sure there hadbeen a horrible mistake. A wizard? Him? How could he possibly be? He'dspent his life being clouted by Dudley, and bullied by Aunt Petunia andUncle Vernon; if he was really a wizard, why hadn't they been turnedinto warty toads every time they'd tried to lock him in his cupboard? Ifhe'd once defeated the greatest sorcerer in the world, how come Dudleyhad always been able to kick him around like a football?"Hagrid," he said quietly, "I think you must have made a mistake. Idon't think I can be a wizard."To his surprise, Hagrid chuckled."Not a wizard, eh? Never made things happen when you was scared orangry?"Harry looked into the fire. Now he came to think about it... every oddthing that had ever made his aunt and uncle furious with him hadhappened when he, Harry, had been upset or angry... chased by Dudley'sgang, he had somehow found himself out of their reach... dreading goingto school with that ridiculous haircut, he'd managed to make it growback... and the very last time Dudley had hit him, hadn't he got his




45revenge, without even realizing he was doing it? Hadn't he set a boaconstrictor on him?Harry looked back at Hagrid, smiling, and saw that Hagrid was positivelybeaming at him."See?" said Hagrid. "Harry Potter, not a wizard -- you wait, you'll beright famous at Hogwarts."But Uncle Vernon wasn't going to give in without a fight."Haven't I told you he's not going?" he hissed. "He's going to StonewallHigh and he'll be grateful for it. I've read those letters and he needsall sorts of rubbish -- spell books and wands and --""If he wants ter go, a great Muggle like you won't stop him," growledHagrid. "Stop Lily an' James Potter' s son goin' ter Hogwarts! Yer mad.His name's been down ever since he was born. He's off ter the finestschool of witchcraft and wizardry in the world. Seven years there and hewon't know himself. He'll be with youngsters of his own sort, fer achange, an' he'll be under the greatest headmaster Hogwarts ever hadAlbus Dumbled--""I AM NOT PAYING FOR SOME CRACKPOT OLD FOOL To TEACH HIMMAGIC TRICKS!"yelled Uncle Vernon.But he had finally gone too far. Hagrid seized his umbrella and whirledit over his head, "NEVER," he thundered, "- INSULT- ALBUS- DUMBLEDORE-IN- FRONT- OF- ME!"He brought the umbrella swishing down through the air to point at Dudley-- there was a flash of violet light, a sound like a firecracker, asharp squeal, and the next second, Dudley was dancing on the spot withhis hands clasped over his fat bottom, howling in pain. When he turnedhis back on them, Harry saw a curly pig's tail poking through a hole inhis trousers.Uncle Vernon roared. Pulling Aunt Petunia and Dudley into the otherroom, he cast one last terrified look at Hagrid and slammed the doorbehind them.Hagrid looked down at his umbrella and stroked his beard.




46"Shouldn'ta lost me temper," he said ruefully, "but it didn't workanyway. Meant ter turn him into a pig, but I suppose he was so much likea pig anyway there wasn't much left ter do."He cast a sideways look at Harry under his bushy eyebrows."Be grateful if yeh didn't mention that ter anyone at Hogwarts," hesaid. "I'm -- er -- not supposed ter do magic, strictly speakin'. I wasallowed ter do a bit ter follow yeh an' get yer letters to yeh an' stuff-- one o' the reasons I was so keen ter take on the job"Why aren't you supposed to do magic?" asked Harry."Oh, well -- I was at Hogwarts meself but I -- er -- got expelled, tertell yeh the truth. In me third year. They snapped me wand in half an'everything. But Dumbledore let me stay on as gamekeeper. Great man,Dumbledore." "Why were you expelled?""It's gettin' late and we've got lots ter do tomorrow," said Hagridloudly. "Gotta get up ter town, get all yer books an' that."He took off his thick black coat and threw it to Harry."You can kip under that," he said. "Don' mind if it wriggles a bit, Ithink I still got a couple o' dormice in one o' the pockets."CHAPTER FIVEDIAGON ALLEYHarry woke early the next morning. Although he could tell it wasdaylight, he kept his eyes shut tight."It was a dream, he told himself firmly. "I dreamed a giant calledHagrid came to tell me I was going to a school for wizards. When I openmy eyes I'll be at home in my cupboard."There was suddenly a loud tapping noise.And there's Aunt Petunia knocking on the door, Harry thought, his heartsinking. But he still didn't open his eyes. It had been such a good




47dream.Tap. Tap. Tap."All right," Harry mumbled, "I'm getting up."He sat up and Hagrid's heavy coat fell off him. The hut was full ofsunlight, the storm was over, Hagrid himself was asleep on the collapsedsofa, and there was an owl rapping its claw on the window, a newspaperheld in its beak.Harry scrambled to his feet, so happy he felt as though a large balloonwas swelling inside him. He went straight to the window and jerked itopen. The owl swooped in and dropped the newspaper on top of Hagrid, whodidn't wake up. The owl then fluttered onto the floor and began toattack Hagrid's coat."Don't do that."Harry tried to wave the owl out of the way, but it snapped its beakfiercely at him and carried on savaging the coat."Hagrid!" said Harry loudly. "There's an owl"Pay him," Hagrid grunted into the sofa."What?""He wants payin' fer deliverin' the paper. Look in the pockets."Hagrid's coat seemed to be made of nothing but pockets -- bunches ofkeys, slug pellets, balls of string, peppermint humbugs, teabags...finally, Harry pulled out a handful of strange-looking coins."Give him five Knuts," said Hagrid sleepily."Knuts?""The little bronze ones."Harry counted out five little bronze coins, and the owl held out his legso Harry could put the money into a small leather pouch tied to it. Thenhe flew off through the open window.




48Hagrid yawned loudly, sat up, and stretched."Best be Off, Harry, lots ter do today, gotta get up ter London an' buyall yer stuff fer school."Harry was turning over the wizard coins and looking at them. He had justthought of something that made him feel as though the happy ballooninside him had got a puncture."Um -- Hagrid?""Mm?" said Hagrid, who was pulling on his huge boots."I haven't got any money -- and you heard Uncle Vernon last night ... hewon't pay for me to go and learn magic.""Don't worry about that," said Hagrid, standing up and scratching hishead. "D'yeh think yer parents didn't leave yeh anything?""But if their house was destroyed --""They didn' keep their gold in the house, boy! Nah, first stop fer us isGringotts. Wizards' bank. Have a sausage, they're not bad cold -- an' Iwouldn' say no teh a bit o' yer birthday cake, neither.""Wizards have banks?""Just the one. Gringotts. Run by goblins."Harry dropped the bit of sausage he was holding."Goblins?""Yeah -- so yeh'd be mad ter try an' rob it, I'll tell yeh that. Nevermess with goblins, Harry. Gringotts is the safest place in the world feranything yeh want ter keep safe -- 'cept maybe Hogwarts. As a matter o'fact, I gotta visit Gringotts anyway. Fer Dumbledore. Hogwartsbusiness." Hagrid drew himself up proudly. "He usually gets me ter doimportant stuff fer him. Fetchin' you gettin' things from Gringotts --knows he can trust me, see."Got everythin'? Come on, then."




49Harry followed Hagrid out onto the rock. The sky was quite clear now andthe sea gleamed in the sunlight. The boat Uncle Vernon had hired wasstill there, with a lot of water in the bottom after the storm."How did you get here?" Harry asked, looking around for another boat."Flew," said Hagrid."Flew?""Yeah -- but we'll go back in this. Not s'pposed ter use magic now I'vegot yeh."They settled down in the boat, Harry still staring at Hagrid, trying toimagine him flying."Seems a shame ter row, though," said Hagrid, giving Harry another ofhis sideways looks. "If I was ter -- er -- speed things up a bit, wouldyeh mind not mentionin' it at Hogwarts?""Of course not," said Harry, eager to see more magic. Hagrid pulled outthe pink umbrella again, tapped it twice on the side of the boat, andthey sped off toward land."Why would you be mad to try and rob Gringotts?" Harry asked."Spells -- enchantments," said Hagrid, unfolding his newspaper as hespoke. "They say there's dragons guardin' the highsecurity vaults. Andthen yeh gotta find yer way -- Gringotts is hundreds of miles underLondon, see. Deep under the Underground. Yeh'd die of hunger tryin' terget out, even if yeh did manage ter get yer hands on summat."Harry sat and thought about this while Hagrid read his newspaper, theDaily Prophet. Harry had learned from Uncle Vernon that people liked tobe left alone while they did this, but it was very difficult, he'd neverhad so many questions in his life."Ministry o' Magic messin' things up as usual," Hagrid muttered, turningthe page."There's a Ministry of Magic?" Harry asked, before he could stophimself."'Course," said Hagrid. "They wanted Dumbledore fer Minister, 0 '




50course, but he'd never leave Hogwarts, so old Cornelius Fudge got thejob. Bungler if ever there was one. So he pelts Dumbledore with owlsevery morning, askin' fer advice.""But what does a Ministry of Magic do?""Well, their main job is to keep it from the Muggles that there's stillwitches an' wizards up an' down the country.""Why?""Why? Blimey, Harry, everyone'd be wantin' magic solutions to theirproblems. Nah, we're best left alone."At this moment the boat bumped gently into the harbor wall. Hagridfolded up his newspaper, and they clambered up the stone steps onto thestreet.Passersby stared a lot at Hagrid as they walked through the little townto the station. Harry couldn't blame them. Not only was Hagrid twice astall as anyone else, he kept pointing at perfectly ordinary things likeparking meters and saying loudly, "See that, Harry? Things these Mugglesdream up, eh?""Hagrid," said Harry, panting a bit as he ran to keep up, "did you saythere are dragons at Gringotts?""Well, so they say," said Hagrid. "Crikey, I'd like a dragon.""You'd like one?""Wanted one ever since I was a kid -- here we go."They had reached the station. There was a train to London in fiveminutes' time. Hagrid, who didn't understand "Muggle money," as hecalled it, gave the bills to Harry so he could buy their tickets.People stared more than ever on the train. Hagrid took up two seats andsat knitting what looked like a canary-yellow circus tent."Still got yer letter, Harry?" he asked as he counted stitches. Harrytook the parchment envelope out of his pocket.




51"Good," said Hagrid. "There's a list there of everything yeh need."Harry unfolded a second piece of paper he hadn't noticed the nightbefore, and read:HOGWARTS SCHOOL of WITCHCRAFT and WIZARDRYUNIFORMFirst-year students will require:1. Three sets of plain work robes (black)2. One plain pointed hat (black) for day wear3. One pair of protective gloves (dragon hide or similar)4. One winter cloak (black, silver fastenings)Please note that all pupils' clothes should carry name tagsCOURSE BOOKSAll students should have a copy of each of the following:The Standard Book of Spells (Grade 1) by Miranda GoshawkA History of Magic by Bathilda BagshotMagical Theory by Adalbert WafflingA Beginners' Guide to Transfiguration by Emetic SwitchOne Thousand Magical Herbs and Fungi by Phyllida SporeMagical Drafts and Potions by Arsenius JiggerFantastic Beasts and Where to Find Them by Newt ScamanderThe Dark Forces: A Guide to Self-Protection by Quentin TrimbleOTHER EQUIPMENT




52wand cauldron (pewter, standard size 2) setglass or crystal phialstelescope setbrass scalesStudents may also bring an owl OR a cat OR a toadPARENTS ARE REMINDED THAT FIRST YEARS ARE NOT ALLOWEDTHEIR OWNBROOMSTICKS"Can we buy all this in London?" Harry wondered aloud."If yeh know where to go," said Hagrid.Harry had never been to London before. Although Hagrid seemed to knowwhere he was going, he was obviously not used to getting there in anordinary way. He got stuck in the ticket barrier on the Underground, andcomplained loudly that the seats were too small and the trains too slow."I don't know how the Muggles manage without magic," he said as theyclimbed a broken-down escalator that led up to a bustling road linedwith shops.Hagrid was so huge that he parted the crowd easily; all Harry had to dowas keep close behind him. They passed book shops and music stores,hamburger restaurants and cinemas, but nowhere that looked as if itcould sell you a magic wand. This was just an ordinary street full ofordinary people. Could there really be piles of wizard gold buried milesbeneath them? Were there really shops that sold spell books andbroomsticks? Might this not all be some huge joke that the Dursleys hadcooked up? If Harry hadn't known that the Dursleys had no sense ofhumor, he might have thought so; yet somehow, even though everythingHagrid had told him so far was unbelievable, Harry couldn't helptrusting him."This is it," said Hagrid, coming to a halt, "the Leaky Cauldron. It's afamous place."It was a tiny, grubby-looking pub. If Hagrid hadn't pointed it out,




53Harry wouldn't have noticed it was there. The people hurrying by didn'tglance at it. Their eyes slid from the big book shop on one side to therecord shop on the other as if they couldn't see the Leaky Cauldron atall. In fact, Harry had the most peculiar feeling that only he andHagrid could see it. Before he could mention this, Hagrid had steeredhim inside.For a famous place, it was very dark and shabby. A few old women weresitting in a corner, drinking tiny glasses of sherry. One of them wassmoking a long pipe. A little man in a top hat was talking to the oldbartender, who was quite bald and looked like a toothless walnut. Thelow buzz of chatter stopped when they walked in. Everyone seemed to knowHagrid; they waved and smiled at him, and the bartender reached for aglass, saying, "The usual, Hagrid?""Can't, Tom, I'm on Hogwarts business," said Hagrid, clapping his greathand on Harry's shoulder and making Harry's knees buckle."Good Lord," said the bartender, peering at Harry, "is this -- can thisbe --?"The Leaky Cauldron had suddenly gone completely still and silent."Bless my soul," whispered the old bartender, "Harry Potter... what anhonor."He hurried out from behind the bar, rushed toward Harry and seized hishand, tears in his eyes."Welcome back, Mr. Potter, welcome back."Harry didn't know what to say. Everyone was looking at him. The oldwoman with the pipe was puffing on it without realizing it had gone out.Hagrid was beaming.Then there was a great scraping of chairs and the next moment, Harryfound himself shaking hands with everyone in the Leaky Cauldron."Doris Crockford, Mr. Potter, can't believe I'm meeting you at last.""So proud, Mr. Potter, I'm just so proud."




54"Always wanted to shake your hand -- I'm all of a flutter.""Delighted, Mr. Potter, just can't tell you, Diggle's the name, DedalusDiggle.""I've seen you before!" said Harry, as Dedalus Diggle's top hat fell offin his excitement. "You bowed to me once in a shop.""He remembers!" cried Dedalus Diggle, looking around at everyone. "Didyou hear that? He remembers me!" Harry shook hands again and again --Doris Crockford kept coming back for more.A pale young man made his way forward, very nervously. One of his eyeswas twitching."Professor Quirrell!" said Hagrid. "Harry, Professor Quirrell will beone of your teachers at Hogwarts.""P-P-Potter," stammered Professor Quirrell, grasping Harry's hand,"c-can't t-tell you how p- pleased I am to meet you.""What sort of magic do you teach, Professor Quirrell?""D-Defense Against the D-D-Dark Arts," muttered Professor Quirrell, asthough he'd rather not think about it. "N-not that you n-need it, eh,P-P-Potter?" He laughed nervously. "You'll be g-getting all yourequipment, I suppose? I've g-got to p-pick up a new b-book on vampires,m-myself." He looked terrified at the very thought.But the others wouldn't let Professor Quirrell keep Harry to himself. Ittook almost ten minutes to get away from them all. At last, Hagridmanaged to make himself heard over the babble."Must get on -- lots ter buy. Come on, Harry."Doris Crockford shook Harry's hand one last time, and Hagrid led themthrough the bar and out into a small, walled courtyard, where there wasnothing but a trash can and a few weeds.Hagrid grinned at Harry."Told yeh, didn't I? Told yeh you was famous. Even Professor Quirrell




55was tremblin' ter meet yeh -- mind you, he's usually tremblin'.""Is he always that nervous?""Oh, yeah. Poor bloke. Brilliant mind. He was fine while he wasstudyin' outta books but then he took a year off ter get some firsthandexperience.... They say he met vampires in the Black Forest, and therewas a nasty bit o' trouble with a hag -- never been the same since.Scared of the students, scared of his own subject now, where's meumbrella?"Vampires? Hags? Harry's head was swimming. Hagrid, meanwhile, wascounting bricks in the wall above the trash can."Three up... two across he muttered. "Right, stand back, Harry."He tapped the wall three times with the point of his umbrella.The brick he had touched quivered -- it wriggled -- in the middle, asmall hole appeared -- it grew wider and wider -- a second later theywere facing an archway large enough even for Hagrid, an archway onto acobbled street that twisted and turned out of sight."Welcome," said Hagrid, "to Diagon Alley."He grinned at Harry's amazement. They stepped through the archway. Harrylooked quickly over his shoulder and saw the archway shrink instantlyback into solid wall.The sun shone brightly on a stack of cauldrons outside the nearest shop.Cauldrons -- All Sizes - Copper, Brass, Pewter, Silver -- Self-Stirring-- Collapsible, said a sign hanging over them."Yeah, you'll be needin' one," said Hagrid, "but we gotta get yer moneyfirst."Harry wished he had about eight more eyes. He turned his head in everydirection as they walked up the street, trying to look at everything atonce: the shops, the things outside them, the people doing theirshopping. A plump woman outside an Apothecary was shaking her head asthey passed, saying, "Dragon liver, seventeen Sickles an ounce, they'remad...."




56A low, soft hooting came from a dark shop with a sign saying Eeylops OwlEmporium -- Tawny, Screech, Barn, Brown, and Snowy. Several boys ofabout Harry's age had their noses pressed against a window withbroomsticks in it. "Look," Harry heard one of them say, "the new NimbusTwo Thousand -- fastest ever --" There were shops selling robes, shopsselling telescopes and strange silver instruments Harry had never seenbefore, windows stacked with barrels of bat spleens and eels' eyes,tottering piles of spell books, quills, and rolls of parchment, potionbottles, globes of the moon...."Gringotts," said Hagrid.They had reached a snowy white building that towered over the otherlittle shops. Standing beside its burnished bronze doors, wearing auniform of scarlet and gold, was -"Yeah, that's a goblin," said Hagrid quietly as they walked up the whitestone steps toward him. The goblin was about a head shorter than Harry.He had a swarthy, clever face, a pointed beard and, Harry noticed, verylong fingers and feet. He bowed as they walked inside. Now they werefacing a second pair of doors, silver this time, with words engravedupon them:Enter, stranger, but take heedOf what awaits the sin of greed,For those who take, but do not earn,Must pay most dearly in their turn.So if you seek beneath our floorsA treasure that was never yours,Thief, you have been warned, bewareOf finding more than treasure there."Like I said, Yeh'd be mad ter try an' rob it," said Hagrid.A pair of goblins bowed them through the silver doors and they were in a




57vast marble hall. About a hundred more goblins were sitting on highstools behind a long counter, scribbling in large ledgers, weighingcoins in brass scales, examining precious stones through eyeglasses.There were too many doors to count leading off the hall, and yet moregoblins were showing people in and out of these. Hagrid and Harry madefor the counter."Morning," said Hagrid to a free goblin. "We've come ter take some moneyoutta Mr. Harry Potter's safe.""You have his key, Sir?""Got it here somewhere," said Hagrid, and he started emptying hispockets onto the counter, scattering a handful of moldy dog biscuitsover the goblin's book of numbers. The goblin wrinkled his nose. Harrywatched the goblin on their right weighing a pile of rubies as big asglowing coals."Got it," said Hagrid at last, holding up a tiny golden key.The goblin looked at it closely."That seems to be in order.""An' I've also got a letter here from Professor Dumbledore," said Hagridimportantly, throwing out his chest. "It's about the YouKnow-What invault seven hundred and thirteen."The goblin read the letter carefully."Very well," he said, handing it back to Hagrid, "I will have Someonetake you down to both vaults. Griphook!"Griphook was yet another goblin. Once Hagrid had crammed all the dogbiscuits back inside his pockets, he and Harry followed Griphook towardone of the doors leading off the hall."What's the You-Know-What in vault seven hundred and thirteen?" Harryasked."Can't tell yeh that," said Hagrid mysteriously. "Very secret. Hogwartsbusiness. Dumbledore's trusted me. More'n my job's worth ter tell yehthat."




58Griphook held the door open for them. Harry, who had expected moremarble, was surprised. They were in a narrow stone passageway lit withflaming torches. It sloped steeply downward and there were littlerailway tracks on the floor. Griphook whistled and a small cart camehurtling up the tracks toward them. They climbed in -- Hagrid with somedifficulty -- and were off.At first they just hurtled through a maze of twisting passages. Harrytried to remember, left, right, right, left, middle fork, right, left,but it was impossible. The rattling cart seemed to know its own way,because Griphook wasn't steering.Harry's eyes stung as the cold air rushed past them, but he kept themwide open. Once, he thought he saw a burst of fire at the end of apassage and twisted around to see if it was a dragon, but too late - -they plunged even deeper, passing an underground lake where hugestalactites and stalagmites grew from the ceiling and floor.I never know," Harry called to Hagrid over the noise of the cart,"what's the difference between a stalagmite and a stalactite?""Stalagmite's got an 'm' in it," said Hagrid. "An' don' ask me questionsjust now, I think I'm gonna be sick."He did look very green, and when the cart stopped at last beside a smalldoor in the passage wall, Hagrid got out and had to lean against thewall to stop his knees from trembling.Griphook unlocked the door. A lot of green smoke came billowing out, andas it cleared, Harry gasped. Inside were mounds of gold coins. Columnsof silver. Heaps of little bronze Knuts."All yours," smiled Hagrid.All Harry's -- it was incredible. The Dursleys couldn't have known aboutthis or they'd have had it from him faster than blinking. How often hadthey complained how much Harry cost them to keep? And all the time therehad been a small fortune belonging to him, buried deep under London.Hagrid helped Harry pile some of it into a bag."The gold ones are Galleons," he explained. "Seventeen silver Sickles to




59a Galleon and twenty-nine Knuts to a Sickle, it's easy enough. Right,that should be enough fer a couple o' terms, we'll keep the rest safefor yeh." He turned to Griphook. "Vault seven hundred and thirteen now,please, and can we go more slowly?""One speed only," said Griphook.They were going even deeper now and gathering speed. The air becamecolder and colder as they hurtled round tight corners. They wentrattling over an underground ravine, and Harry leaned over the side totry to see what was down at the dark bottom, but Hagrid groaned andpulled him back by the scruff of his neck.Vault seven hundred and thirteen had no keyhole."Stand back," said Griphook importantly. He stroked the door gently withone of his long fingers and it simply melted away."If anyone but a Gringotts goblin tried that, they'd be sucked throughthe door and trapped in there," said Griphook."How often do you check to see if anyone's inside?" Harry asked."About once every ten years," said Griphook with a rather nasty grin.Something really extraordinary had to be inside this top security vault,Harry was sure, and he leaned forward eagerly, expecting to see fabulousjewels at the very least -- but at first he thought it was empty. Thenhe noticed a grubby little package wrapped up in brown paper lying onthe floor. Hagrid picked it up and tucked it deep inside his coat. Harrylonged to know what it was, but knew better than to ask."Come on, back in this infernal cart, and don't talk to me on the wayback, it's best if I keep me mouth shut," said Hagrid.One wild cart ride later they stood blinking in the sunlight outsideGringotts. Harry didn't know where to run first now that he had a bagfull of money. He didn't have to know how many Galleons there were to apound to know that he was holding more money than he'd had in his wholelife -- more money than even Dudley had ever had."Might as well get yer uniform," said Hagrid, nodding toward MadamMalkin's Robes for All Occasions. "Listen, Harry, would yeh mind if I




60slipped off fer a pick-me-up in the Leaky Cauldron? I hate themGringotts carts." He did still look a bit sick, so Harry entered MadamMalkin's shop alone, feeling nervous.Madam Malkin was a squat, smiling witch dressed all in mauve."Hogwarts, clear?" she said, when Harry started to speak. "Got the lothere -- another young man being fitted up just now, in fact. "In the back of the shop, a boy with a pale, pointed face was standing ona footstool while a second witch pinned up his long black robes. MadamMalkin stood Harry on a stool next to him) slipped a long robe over hishead, and began to pin it to the right length."Hello," said the boy, "Hogwarts, too?""Yes," said Harry."My father's next door buying my books and mother's up the streetlooking at wands," said the boy. He had a bored, drawling voice. "ThenI'm going to drag them off to took at racing brooms. I don't see whyfirst years can't have their own. I think I'll bully father into gettingme one and I'll smuggle it in somehow."Harry was strongly reminded of Dudley."Have you got your own broom?" the boy went on."No," said Harry."Play Quidditch at all?""No," Harry said again, wondering what on earth Quidditch could be."I do -- Father says it's a crime if I'm not picked to play for myhouse, and I must say, I agree. Know what house you'll be in yet?""No," said Harry, feeling more stupid by the minute."Well, no one really knows until they get there, do they, but I knowI'll be in Slytherin, all our family have been -- imagine being inHufflepuff, I think I'd leave, wouldn't you?" "Mmm," said Harry, wishinghe could say something a bit more interesting.




61"I say, look at that man!" said the boy suddenly, nodding toward thefront window. Hagrid was standing there, grinning at Harry and pointingat two large ice creams to show he couldn't come in."That's Hagrid," said Harry, pleased to know something the boy didn't."He works at Hogwarts.""Oh," said the boy, "I've heard of him. He's a sort of servant, isn'the?""He's the gamekeeper," said Harry. He was liking the boy less and lessevery second."Yes, exactly. I heard he's a sort of savage -- lives in a hut on theschool grounds and every now and then he gets drunk, tries to do magic,and ends up setting fire to his bed.""I think he's brilliant," said Harry coldly."Do you?" said the boy, with a slight sneer. "Why is he with you? Whereare your parents?""They're dead," said Harry shortly. He didn't feel much like going intothe matter with this boy."Oh, sorry," said the other,. not sounding sorry at all. "But they wereour kind, weren't they?""They were a witch and wizard, if that's what you mean.""I really don't think they should let the other sort in, do you? They'rejust not the same, they've never been brought up to know our ways. Someof them have never even heard of Hogwarts until they get the letter,imagine. I think they should keep it in the old wizarding families.What's your surname, anyway?"But before Harry could answer, Madam Malkin said, "That's you done, mydear," and Harry, not sorry for an excuse to stop talking to the boy,hopped down from the footstool."Well, I'll see you at Hogwarts, I suppose," said the drawling boy.




62Harry was rather quiet as he ate the ice cream Hagrid had bought him(chocolate and raspberry with chopped nuts)."What's up?" said Hagrid."Nothing," Harry lied. They stopped to buy parchment and quills. Harrycheered up a bit when he found a bottle of ink that changed color as youwrote. When they had left the shop, he said, "Hagrid, what's Quidditch?""Blimey, Harry, I keep forgettin' how little yeh know -- not knowin'about Quidditch!""Don't make me feel worse," said Harry. He told Hagrid about the pateboy in Madam Malkin's."--and he said people from Muggle families shouldn't even be allowedin.""Yer not from a Muggle family. If he'd known who yeh were -- he's grownup knowin' yer name if his parents are wizardin' folk. You saw whateveryone in the Leaky Cauldron was like when they saw yeh. Anyway, whatdoes he know about it, some o' the best I ever saw were the only oneswith magic in 'em in a long line 0' Muggles -- look at yer mum! Lookwhat she had fer a sister!""So what is Quidditch?""It's our sport. Wizard sport. It's like -- like soccer in the Muggleworld -- everyone follows Quidditch -- played up in the air onbroomsticks and there's four balls -- sorta hard ter explain the rules.""And what are Slytherin and Hufflepuff?""School houses. There's four. Everyone says Hufflepuff are a lot o'duffers, but --""I bet I'm in Hufflepuff" said Harry gloomily."Better Hufflepuff than Slytherin," said Hagrid darkly. "There's not asingle witch or wizard who went bad who wasn't in Slytherin.You-Know-Who was one.""Vol-, sorry - You-Know-Who was at Hogwarts?"




63"Years an' years ago," said Hagrid.They bought Harry's school books in a shop called Flourish and Blottswhere the shelves were stacked to the ceiling with books as large aspaving stones bound in leather; books the size of postage stamps incovers of silk; books full of peculiar symbols and a few books withnothing in them at all. Even Dudley, who never read anything, would havebeen wild to get his hands on some of these. Hagrid almost had to dragHarry away from Curses and Countercurses (Bewitch Your Friends andBefuddle Your Enemies with the Latest Revenges: Hair Loss, Jelly-Legs,Tongue- Tying and Much, Much More) by Professor Vindictus Viridian."I was trying to find out how to curse Dudley.""I'm not sayin' that's not a good idea, but yer not ter use magic in theMuggle world except in very special circumstances," said Hagrid. "An'anyway, yeh couldn' work any of them curses yet, yeh'll need a lot morestudy before yeh get ter that level."Hagrid wouldn't let Harry buy a solid gold cauldron, either ("It sayspewter on yer list"), but they got a nice set of scales for weighingpotion ingredients and a collapsible brass telescope. Then they visitedthe Apothecary, which was fascinating enough to make up for its horriblesmell, a mixture of bad eggs and rotted cabbages. Barrels of slimy stuffstood on the floor; jars of herbs, dried roots, and bright powders linedthe walls; bundles of feathers, strings of fangs, and snarled claws hungfrom the ceiling. While Hagrid asked the man behind the counter for asupply of some basic potion ingredients for Harry, Harry himselfexamined silver unicorn horns at twenty-one Galleons each and minuscule,glittery-black beetle eyes (five Knuts a scoop).Outside the Apothecary, Hagrid checked Harry's list again."Just yer wand left - A yeah, an' I still haven't got yeh a birthdaypresent."Harry felt himself go red."You don't have to --""I know I don't have to. Tell yeh what, I'll get yer animal. Not a toad,toads went outta fashion years ago, yeh'd be laughed at - an' I don'like cats, they make me sneeze. I'll get yer an owl. All the kids want




64owls, they're dead useful, carry yer mail an' everythin'."Twenty minutes later, they left Eeylops Owl Emporium, which had beendark and full of rustling and flickering, jewel-bright eyes. Harry nowcarried a large cage that held a beautiful snowy owl, fast asleep withher head under her wing. He couldn't stop stammering his thanks,sounding just like Professor Quirrell."Don' mention it," said Hagrid gruffly. "Don' expect you've had a lottapresents from them Dursleys. Just Ollivanders left now - only place ferwands, Ollivanders, and yeh gotta have the best wand."A magic wand... this was what Harry had been really looking forward to.The last shop was narrow and shabby. Peeling gold letters over the doorread Ollivanders: Makers of Fine Wands since 382 B.C. A single wand layon a faded purple cushion in the dusty window.A tinkling bell rang somewhere in the depths of the shop as they steppedinside. It was a tiny place, empty except for a single, spindly chairthat Hagrid sat on to wait. Harry felt strangely as though he hadentered a very strict library; he swallowed a lot of new questions thathad just occurred to him and looked instead at the thousands of narrowboxes piled neatly right up to the ceiling. For some reason, the back ofhis neck prickled. The very dust and silence in here seemed to tinglewith some secret magic."Good afternoon," said a soft voice. Harry jumped. Hagrid must havejumped, too, because there was a loud crunching noise and he got quicklyoff the spindly chair.An old man was standing before them, his wide, pale eyes shining likemoons through the gloom of the shop."Hello," said Harry awkwardly."Ah yes," said the man. "Yes, yes. I thought I'd be seeing you soon.Harry Potter." It wasn't a question. "You have your mother's eyes. Itseems only yesterday she was in here herself, buying her first wand. Tenand a quarter inches long, swishy, made of willow. Nice wand for charmwork."Mr. Ollivander moved closer to Harry. Harry wished he would blink. Those




65silvery eyes were a bit creepy."Your father, on the other hand, favored a mahogany wand. Eleven inches.Pliable. A little more power and excellent for transfiguration. Well, Isay your father favored it -- it's really the wand that chooses thewizard, of course."Mr. Ollivander had come so close that he and Harry were almost nose tonose. Harry could see himself reflected in those misty eyes."And that's where..."Mr. Ollivander touched the lightning scar on Harry's forehead with along, white finger."I'm sorry to say I sold the wand that did it," he said softly."Thirteen-and-a-half inches. Yew. Powerful wand, very powerful, and inthe wrong hands... well, if I'd known what that wand was going out intothe world to do...."He shook his head and then, to Harry's relief, spotted Hagrid."Rubeus! Rubeus Hagrid! How nice to see you again.... Oak, sixteeninches, rather bendy, wasn't it?""It was, sir, yes," said Hagrid."Good wand, that one. But I suppose they snapped it in half when you gotexpelled?" said Mr. Ollivander, suddenly stern."Er -- yes, they did, yes," said Hagrid, shuffling his feet. "I've stillgot the pieces, though," he added brightly."But you don't use them?" said Mr. Ollivander sharply."Oh, no, sit," said Hagrid quickly. Harry noticed he gripped his pinkumbrella very tightly as he spoke."Hmmm," said Mr. Ollivander, giving Hagrid a piercing look. "Well, now-- Mr. Potter. Let me see." He pulled a long tape measure with silvermarkings out of his pocket. "Which is your wand arm?""Er -- well, I'm right-handed," said Harry.




66"Hold out your arm. That's it." He measured Harry from shoulder tofinger, then wrist to elbow, shoulder to floor, knee to armpit and roundhis head. As he measured, he said, "Every Ollivander wand has a core ofa powerful magical substance, Mr. Potter. We use unicorn hairs, phoenixtail feathers, and the heartstrings of dragons. No two Ollivander wandsare the same, just as no two unicorns, dragons, or phoenixes are quitethe same. And of course, you will never get such good results withanother wizard's wand."Harry suddenly realized that the tape measure, which was measuringbetween his nostrils, was doing this on its own. Mr. Ollivander wasflitting around the shelves, taking down boxes."That will do," he said, and the tape measure crumpled into a heap onthe floor. "Right then, Mr. Potter. Try this one. Beechwood and dragonheartstring. Nine inches. Nice and flexible. just take it and give it awave."Harry took the wand and (feeling foolish) waved it around a bit, but Mr.Ollivander snatched it out of his hand almost at once."Maple and phoenix feather. Seven inches. Quite whippy. Try --"Harry tried -- but he had hardly raised the wand when it, too, wassnatched back by Mr. Ollivander."No, no -here, ebony and unicorn hair, eight and a half inches, springy.Go on, go on, try it out."Harry tried. And tried. He had no idea what Mr. Ollivander was waitingfor. The pile of tried wands was mounting higher and higher on thespindly chair, but the more wands Mr. Ollivander pulled from theshelves, the happier he seemed to become."Tricky customer, eh? Not to worry, we'll find the perfect match heresomewhere -- I wonder, now - - yes, why not -- unusual combination --holly and phoenix feather, eleven inches, nice and supple."Harry took the wand. He felt a sudden warmth in his fingers. He raisedthe wand above his head, brought it swishing down through the dusty airand a stream of red and gold sparks shot from the end like a firework,throwing dancing spots of light on to the walls. Hagrid whooped and




67clapped and Mr. Ollivander cried, "Oh, bravo! Yes, indeed, oh, verygood. Well, well, well... how curious... how very curious... "He put Harry's wand back into its box and wrapped it in brown paper,still muttering, "Curious... curious.."Sorry," said Harry, "but what's curious?"Mr. Ollivander fixed Harry with his pale stare."I remember every wand I've ever sold, Mr. Potter. Every single wand. Itso happens that the phoenix whose tail feather is in your wand, gaveanother feather -- just one other. It is very curious indeed that youshould be destined for this wand when its brother why, its brother gaveyou that scar."Harry swallowed."Yes, thirteen-and-a-half inches. Yew. Curious indeed how these thingshappen. The wand chooses the wizard, remember.... I think we must expectgreat things from you, Mr. Potter.... After all, He-Who-Must-Not-Be-Named did great things -- terrible, yes, but great."Harry shivered. He wasn't sure he liked Mr. Ollivander too much. He paidseven gold Galleons for his wand, and Mr. Ollivander bowed them from hisshop.The late afternoon sun hung low in the sky as Harry and Hagrid madetheir way back down Diagon Alley, back through the wall, back throughthe Leaky Cauldron, now empty. Harry didn't speak at all as they walkeddown the road; he didn't even notice how much people were gawking atthem on the Underground, laden as they were with all their funny-shapedpackages, with the snowy owl asleep in its cage on Harry's lap. Upanother escalator, out into Paddington station; Harry only realizedwhere they were when Hagrid tapped him on the shoulder."Got time fer a bite to eat before yer train leaves," he said.He bought Harry a hamburger and they sat down on plastic seats to eatthem. Harry kept looking around. Everything looked so strange, somehow."You all right, Harry? Yer very quiet," said Hagrid.




68Harry wasn't sure he could explain. He'd just had the best birthday ofhis life -- and yet -- he chewed his hamburger, trying to find thewords."Everyone thinks I'm special," he said at last. "All those people in theLeaky Cauldron, Professor Quirrell, Mr. Ollivander... but I don't knowanything about magic at all. How can they expect great things? I'mfamous and I can't even remember what I'm famous for. I don't know whathappened when Vol-, sorry -- I mean, the night my parents died."Hagrid leaned across the table. Behind the wild beard and eyebrows hewore a very kind smile."Don' you worry, Harry. You'll learn fast enough. Everyone starts at thebeginning at Hogwarts, you'll be just fine. just be yerself. I know it'shard. Yeh've been singled out, an' that's always hard. But yeh'll have agreat time at Hogwarts -- I did -- still do, 'smatter of fact."Hagrid helped Harry on to the train that would take him back to theDursleys, then handed him an envelope."Yer ticket fer Hogwarts, " he said. "First o' September -- King's Cross-- it's all on yer ticket. Any problems with the Dursleys, send me aletter with yer owl, she'll know where to find me.... See yeh soon,Harry."The train pulled out of the station. Harry wanted to watch Hagrid untilhe was out of sight; he rose in his seat and pressed his nose againstthe window, but he blinked and Hagrid had gone.CHAPTER SIXTHE JOURNEY FROM PLATFORM NINE AND THREE-QUARTERSHarry's last month with the Dursleys wasn't fun. True, Dudley was now soscared of Harry he wouldn't stay in the same room, while Aunt Petuniaand Uncle Vernon didn't shut Harry in his cupboard, force him to doanything, or shout at him -- in fact, they didn't speak to him at all.Half terrified, half furious, they acted as though any chair with Harryin it were empty. Although this was an improvement in many ways, it didbecome a bit depressing after a while.




69Harry kept to his room, with his new owl for company. He had decided tocall her Hedwig, a name he had found in A History of Magic. His schoolbooks were very interesting. He lay on his bed reading late into thenight, Hedwig swooping in and out of the open window as she pleased. Itwas lucky that Aunt Petunia didn't come in to vacuum anymore, becauseHedwig kept bringing back dead mice. Every night before he went tosleep, Harry ticked off another day on the piece of paper he had pinnedto the wall, counting down to September the first.On the last day of August he thought he'd better speak to his aunt anduncle about getting to King's Cross station the next day, so he wentdown to the living room where they were watching a quiz show ontelevision. He cleared his throat to let them know he was there, andDudley screamed and ran from the room."Er -- Uncle Vernon?"Uncle Vernon grunted to show he was listening."Er -- I need to be at King's Cross tomorrow to -- to go to Hogwarts."Uncle Vernon grunted again."Would it be all right if you gave me a lift?"Grunt. Harry supposed that meant yes."Thank you."He was about to go back upstairs when Uncle Vernon actually spoke."Funny way to get to a wizards' school, the train. Magic carpets all gotpunctures, have they?"Harry didn't say anything."Where is this school, anyway?""I don't know," said Harry, realizing this for the first time. He pulledthe ticket Hagrid had given him out of his pocket."I just take the train from platform nine and three-quarters at eleveno'clock," he read.




70His aunt and uncle stared."Platform what?""Nine and three-quarters.""Don't talk rubbish," said Uncle Vernon. "There is no platform nine andthree-quarters.""It's on my ticket.""Barking," said Uncle Vernon, "howling mad, the lot of them. You'll see.You just wait. All right, we'll take you to King's Cross. We're going upto London tomorrow anyway, or I wouldn't bother.""Why are you going to London?" Harry asked, trying to keep thingsfriendly."Taking Dudley to the hospital," growled Uncle Vernon. "Got to have thatruddy tail removed before he goes to Smeltings."Harry woke at five o'clock the next morning and was too excited andnervous to go back to sleep. He got up and pulled on his jeans becausehe didn't want to walk into the station in his wizard's robes -- he'dchange on the train. He checked his Hogwarts list yet again to make surehe had everything he needed, saw that Hedwig was shut safely in hercage, and then paced the room, waiting for the Dursleys to get up. Twohours later, Harry's huge, heavy trunk had been loaded into theDursleys' car, Aunt Petunia had talked Dudley into sitting next toHarry, and they had set off.They reached King's Cross at half past ten. Uncle Vernon dumped Harry'strunk onto a cart and wheeled it into the station for him. Harry thoughtthis was strangely kind until Uncle Vernon stopped dead, facing theplatforms with a nasty grin on his face."Well, there you are, boy. Platform nine -- platform ten. Your platformshould be somewhere in the middle, but they don't seem to have built ityet, do they?"He was quite right, of course. There was a big plastic number nine overone platform and a big plastic number ten over the one next to it, and




71in the middle, nothing at all."Have a good term," said Uncle Vernon with an even nastier smile. Heleft without another word. Harry turned and saw the Dursleys drive away.All three of them were laughing. Harry's mouth went rather dry. What onearth was he going to do? He was starting to attract a lot of funnylooks, because of Hedwig. He'd have to ask someone.He stopped a passing guard, but didn't dare mention platform nine andthree-quarters. The guard had never heard of Hogwarts and when Harrycouldn't even tell him what part of the country it was in, he started toget annoyed, as though Harry was being stupid on purpose. Gettingdesperate, Harry asked for the train that left at eleven o'clock, butthe guard said there wasn't one. In the end the guard strode away,muttering about time wasters. Harry was now trying hard not to panic.According to the large clock over the arrivals board, he had ten minutesleft to get on the train to Hogwarts and he had no idea how to do it; hewas stranded in the middle of a station with a trunk he could hardlylift, a pocket full of wizard money, and a large owl.Hagrid must have forgotten to tell him something you had to do, liketapping the third brick on the left to get into Diagon Alley. Hewondered if he should get out his wand and start tapping the ticketinspector's stand between platforms nine and ten.At that moment a group of people passed just behind him and he caught afew words of what they were saying."-- packed with Muggles, of course --"Harry swung round. The speaker was a plump woman who was talking to fourboys, all with flaming red hair. Each of them was pushing a trunk likeHarry's in front of him -- and they had an owl.Heart hammering, Harry pushed his cart after them. They stopped and sodid he, just near enough to hear what they were saying."Now, what's the platform number?" said the boys' mother."Nine and three-quarters!" piped a small girl, also red-headed, who washolding her hand, "Mom, can't I go... ""You're not old enough, Ginny, now be quiet. All right, Percy, you go




72first."What looked like the oldest boy marched toward platforms nine and ten.Harry watched, careful not to blink in case he missed it -- but just asthe boy reached the dividing barrier between the two platforms, a largecrowd of tourists came swarming in front of him and by the time the lastbackpack had cleared away, the boy had vanished."Fred, you next," the plump woman said."I'm not Fred, I'm George," said the boy. "Honestly, woman, you callyourself our mother? CarA you tell I'm George?""Sorry, George, dear.""Only joking, I am Fred," said the boy, and off he went. His twin calledafter him to hurry up, and he must have done so, because a second later,he had gone -- but how had he done it?Now the third brother was walking briskly toward the barrier he wasalmost there -- and then, quite suddenly, he wasn't anywhere.There was nothing else for it."Excuse me," Harry said to the plump woman."Hello, dear," she said. "First time at Hogwarts? Ron's new, too."She pointed at the last and youngest of her sons. He was tall, thin, andgangling, with freckles, big hands and feet, and a long nose."Yes," said Harry. "The thing is -- the thing is, I don't know how to--""How to get onto the platform?" she said kindly, and Harry nodded."Not to worry," she said. "All you have to do is walk straight at thebarrier between platforms nine and ten. Don't stop and don't be scaredyou'll crash into it, that's very important. Best do it at a bit of arun if you're nervous. Go on, go now before Ron.""Er -- okay," said Harry.




73He pushed his trolley around and stared at the barrier. It looked verysolid.He started to walk toward it. People jostled him on their way toplatforms nine and ten. Harry walked more quickly. He was going to smashright into that barrier and then he'd be in trouble -- leaning forwardon his cart, he broke into a heavy run -- the barrier was coming nearerand nearer -- he wouldn't be able to stop -- the cart was out of control-- he was a foot away -- he closed his eyes ready for the crash --It didn't come... he kept on running... he opened his eyes. A scarletsteam engine was waiting next to a platform packed with people. A signoverhead said Hogwarts Express, eleven O'clock. Harry looked behind himand saw a wrought-iron archway where the barrier had been, with thewords Platform Nine and Three-Quarters on it, He had done it.Smoke from the engine drifted over the heads of the chattering crowd,while cats of every color wound here and there between their legs. Owlshooted to one another in a disgruntled sort of way over the babble andthe scraping of heavy trunks.The first few carriages were already packed with students, some hangingout of the window to talk to their families, some fighting over seats.Harry pushed his cart off down the platform in search of an empty seat.He passed a round-faced boy who was saying, "Gran, I've lost my toadagain.""Oh, Neville," he heard the old woman sigh.A boy with dreadlocks was surrounded by a small crowd."Give us a look, Lee, go on."The boy lifted the lid of a box in his arms, and the people around himshrieked and yelled as something inside poked out a long, hairy leg.Harry pressed on through the crowd until he found an empty compartmentnear the end of the train. He put Hedwig inside first and then startedto shove and heave his trunk toward the train door. He tried to lift itup the steps but could hardly raise one end and twice he dropped itpainfully on his foot."Want a hand?" It was one of the red-haired twins he'd followed through




74the barrier."Yes, please," Harry panted."Oy, Fred! C'mere and help!"With the twins' help, Harry's trunk was at last tucked away in a cornerof the compartment."Thanks," said Harry, pushing his sweaty hair out of his eyes."What's that?" said one of the twins suddenly, pointing at Harry'slightning scar."Blimey," said the other twin. "Are you"He is," said the first twin. "Aren't you?" he added to Harry."What?" said Harry."Harry Potter, "chorused the twins."Oh, him," said Harry. "I mean, yes, I am."The two boys gawked at him, and Harry felt himself turning red. Then, tohis relief, a voice came floating in through the train's open door."Fred? George? Are you there?""Coming, Mom."With a last look at Harry, the twins hopped off the train.Harry sat down next to the window where, half hidden, he could watch thered-haired family on the platform and hear what they were saying. Theirmother had just taken out her handkerchief."Ron, you've got something on your nose."The youngest boy tried to jerk out of the way, but she grabbed him andbegan rubbing the end of his nose."Mom -- geroff" He wriggled free.




75"Aaah, has ickle Ronnie got somefink on his nosie?" said one of thetwins."Shut up," said Ron."Where's Percy?" said their mother."He's coming now."The oldest boy came striding into sight. He had already changed into hisbillowing black Hogwarts robes, and Harry noticed a shiny silver badgeon his chest with the letter P on it."Can't stay long, Mother," he said. "I'm up front, the prefects have gottwo compartments to themselves --""Oh, are you a prefect, Percy?" said one of the twins, with an air ofgreat surprise. "You should have said something, we had no idea.""Hang on, I think I remember him saying something about it," said theother twin. "Once --""Or twice --""A minute --""All summer --""Oh, shut up," said Percy the Prefect."How come Percy gets new robes, anyway?" said one of the twins."Because he's a prefect," said their mother fondly. "All right, dear,well, have a good term -- send me an owl when you get there."She kissed Percy on the cheek and he left. Then she turned to the twins."Now, you two -- this year, you behave yourselves. If I get one more owltelling me you've -- you've blown up a toilet or --""Blown up a toilet? We've never blown up a toilet."




76"Great idea though, thanks, Mom.""It's not funny. And look after Ron.""Don't worry, ickle Ronniekins is safe with us.""Shut up," said Ron again. He was almost as tall as the twins alreadyand his nose was still pink where his mother had rubbed it."Hey, Mom, guess what? Guess who we just met on the train?"Harry leaned back quickly so they couldn't see him looking."You know that black-haired boy who was near us in the station? Know whohe is?""Who?""Harry Potter!"Harry heard the little girl's voice."Oh, Mom, can I go on the train and see him, Mom, eh please....""You've already seen him, Ginny, and the poor boy isn't something yougoggle at in a zoo. Is he really, Fred? How do you know?""Asked him. Saw his scar. It's really there - like lightning.""Poor dear - no wonder he was alone, I wondered. He was ever so politewhen he asked how to get onto the platform.""Never mind that, do you think he remembers what You-Know-Who lookslike?"Their mother suddenly became very stern."I forbid you to ask him, Fred. No, don't you dare. As though he needsreminding of that on his first day at school.""All right, keep your hair on."A whistle sounded.




77"Hurry up!" their mother said, and the three boys clambered onto thetrain. They leaned out of the window for her to kiss them good-bye, andtheir younger sister began to cry."Don't, Ginny, we'll send you loads of owls.""We'll send you a Hogwarts toilet seat.""George!""Only joking, Mom."The train began to move. Harry saw the boys' mother waving and theirsister, half laughing, half crying, running to keep up with the trainuntil it gathered too much speed, then she fell back and waved.Harry watched the girl and her mother disappear as the train rounded thecorner. Houses flashed past the window. Harry felt a great leap ofexcitement. He didn't know what he was going to but it had to be betterthan what he was leaving behind.The door of the compartment slid open and the youngest redheaded boycame in."Anyone sitting there?" he asked, pointing at the seat opposite Harry."Everywhere else is full."Harry shook his head and the boy sat down. He glanced at Harry and thenlooked quickly out of the window, pretending he hadn't looked. Harry sawhe still had a black mark on his nose."Hey, Ron."The twins were back."Listen, we're going down the middle of the train -- Lee Jordan's got agiant tarantula down there.""Right," mumbled Ron."Harry," said the other twin, "did we introduce ourselves? Fred andGeorge Weasley. And this is Ron, our brother. See you later, then.




78"Bye," said Harry and Ron. The twins slid the compartment door shutbehind them."Are you really Harry Potter?" Ron blurted out.Harry nodded."Oh -well, I thought it might be one of Fred and George's jokes," saidRon. "And have you really got -- you know..."He pointed at Harry's forehead.Harry pulled back his bangs to show the lightning scar. Ron stared."So that's where You-Know-Who"Yes," said Harry, "but I can't remember it.""Nothing?" said Ron eagerly."Well -- I remember a lot of green light, but nothing else.""Wow," said Ron. He sat and stared at Harry for a few moments, then, asthough he had suddenly realized what he was doing, he looked quickly outof the window again."Are all your family wizards?" asked Harry, who found Ron just asinteresting as Ron found him."Er -- Yes, I think so," said Ron. "I think Mom's got a second cousinwho's an accountant, but we never talk about him.""So you must know loads of magic already."The Weasleys were clearly one of those old wizarding families the paleboy in Diagon Alley had talked about."I heard you went to live with Muggles," said Ron. "What are they like?""Horrible -well, not all of them. My aunt and uncle and cousin are,though. Wish I'd had three wizard brothers."




79"Five," said Ron. For some reason, he was looking gloomy. "I'm the sixthin our family to go to Hogwarts. You could say I've got a lot to live upto. Bill and Charlie have already left -- Bill was head boy and Charliewas captain of Quidditch. Now Percy's a prefect. Fred and George messaround a lot, but they still get really good marks and everyone thinksthey're really funny. Everyone expects me to do as well as the others,but if I do, it's no big deal, because they did it first. You never getanything new, either, with five brothers. I've got Bill's old robes,Charlie's old wand, and Percy's old rat."Ron reached inside his jacket and pulled out a fat gray rat, which wasasleep."His name's Scabbers and he's useless, he hardly ever wakes up. Percygot an owl from my dad for being made a prefect, but they couldn't aff-- I mean, I got Scabbers instead."Ron's ears went pink. He seemed to think he'd said too much, because hewent back to staring out of the window.Harry didn't think there was anything wrong with not being able toafford an owl. After all, he'd never had any money in his life until amonth ago, and he told Ron so, all about having to wear Dudley's oldclothes and never getting proper birthday presents. This seemed to cheerRon up."... and until Hagrid told me, I didn't know anything about be ing awizard or about my parents or Voldemort"Ron gasped."What?" said Harry."You said You-Know-Who's name!" said Ron, sounding both shocked andimpressed. "I'd have thought you, of all people --""I'm not trying to be brave or anything, saying the name," said Harry, Ijust never knew you shouldn't. See what I mean? I've got loads tolearn.... I bet," he added, voicing for the first time something thathad been worrying him a lot lately, "I bet I'm the worst in the class.""You won't be. There's loads of people who come from Muggle families andthey learn quick enough."




80While they had been talking, the train had carried them out of London.Now they were speeding past fields full of cows and sheep. They werequiet for a time, watching the fields and lanes flick past.Around half past twelve there was a great clattering outside in thecorridor and a smiling, dimpled woman slid back their door and said,"Anything off the cart, dears?"Harry, who hadn't had any breakfast, leapt to his feet, but Ron's earswent pink again and he muttered that he'd brought sandwiches. Harry wentout into the corridor.He had never had any money for candy with the Dursleys, and now that hehad pockets rattling with gold and silver he was ready to buy as manyMars Bars as he could carry -- but the woman didn't have Mars Bars. Whatshe did have were Bettie Bott's Every Flavor Beans, Drooble's BestBlowing Gum, Chocolate Frogs. Pumpkin Pasties, Cauldron Cakes, LicoriceWands, and a number of other strange things Harry had never seen in hislife. Not wanting to miss anything, he got some of everything and paidthe woman eleven silver Sickles and seven bronze Knuts.Ron stared as Harry brought it all back in to the compartment and tippedit onto an empty seat."Hungry, are you?""Starving," said Harry, taking a large bite out of a pumpkin pasty.Ron had taken out a lumpy package and unwrapped it. There were foursandwiches inside. He pulled one of them apart and said, "She alwaysforgets I don't like corned beef.""Swap you for one of these," said Harry, holding up a pasty. "Go on --""You don't want this, it's all dry," said Ron. "She hasn't got muchtime," he added quickly, "you know, with five of us.""Go on, have a pasty," said Harry, who had never had anything to sharebefore or, indeed, anyone to share it with. It was a nice feeling,sitting there with Ron, eating their way through all Harry's pasties,cakes, and candies (the sandwiches lay forgotten).




81"What are these?" Harry asked Ron, holding up a pack of Chocolate Frogs."They're not really frogs, are they?" He was starting to feel thatnothing would surprise him."No," said Ron. "But see what the card is. I'm missing Agrippa.""What?""Oh, of course, you wouldn't know -- Chocolate Frogs have cards, insidethem, you know, to collect -- famous witches and wizards. I've got aboutfive hundred, but I haven't got Agrippa or Ptolemy."Harry unwrapped his Chocolate Frog and picked up the card. It showed aman's face. He wore half- moon glasses, had a long, crooked nose, andflowing silver hair, beard, and mustache. Underneath the picture was thename Albus Dumbledore."So this is Dumbledore!" said Harry."Don't tell me you'd never heard of Dumbledore!" said Ron. "Can I have afrog? I might get Agrippa -- thanksHarry turned over his card and read:ALBUS DUMBLEDORECURRENTLY HEADMASTER OF HOGWARTSConsidered by many the greatest wizard of modern times, Dumbledore isparticularly famous for his defeat of the dark wizard Grindelwald in1945, for the discovery of the twelve uses of dragon's blood, and hiswork on alchemy with his partner, Nicolas Flamel. Professor Dumbledoreenjoys chamber music and tenpin bowling.Harry turned the card back over and saw, to his astonishment, thatDumbledore's face had disappeared."He's gone!""Well, you can't expect him to hang around all day," said Ron. "He'll beback. No, I've got Morgana again and I've got about six of her... do youwant it? You can start collecting."




82Ron's eyes strayed to the pile of Chocolate Frogs waiting to beunwrapped."Help yourself," said Harry. "But in, you know, the Muggle world, peoplejust stay put in photos.""Do they? What, they don't move at all?" Ron sounded amazed. "weird!"Harry stared as Dumbledore sidled back into the picture on his card andgave him a small smile. Ron was more interested in eating the frogs thanlooking at the Famous Witches and Wizards cards, but Harry couldn't keephis eyes off them. Soon he had not only Dumbledore and Morgana, butHengist of Woodcroft, Alberic Grunnion, Circe, Paracelsus, and Merlin.He finally tore his eyes away from the druidess Cliodna, who wasscratching her nose, to open a bag of Bertie Bott's Every Flavor Beans."You want to be careful with those," Ron warned Harry. "When they sayevery flavor, they mean every flavor -- you know, you get all theordinary ones like chocolate and peppermint and mar- malade, but thenyou can get spinach and liver and tripe. George reckons he had a booger-flavored one once."Ron picked up a green bean, looked at it carefully, and bit into acorner."Bleaaargh -- see? Sprouts."They had a good time eating the Every Flavor Beans. Harry got toast,coconut, baked bean, strawberry, curry, grass, coffee, sardine, and waseven brave enough to nibble the end off a funny gray one Ron wouldn'ttouch, which turned out to be pepper.The countryside now flying past the window was becoming wilder. The neatfields had gone. Now there were woods, twisting rivers, and dark greenhills.There was a knock on the door of their compartment and the round-facedboy Harry had passed on platform nine and threequarters came in. Helooked tearful."Sorry," he said, "but have you seen a toad at all?"When they shook their heads, he wailed, "I've lost him! He keeps getting




83away from me!""He'll turn up," said Harry."Yes," said the boy miserably. "Well, if you see him..."He left."Don't know why he's so bothered," said Ron. "If I'd brought a toad I'dlose it as quick as I could. Mind you, I brought Scabbers, so I can'ttalk."The rat was still snoozing on Ron's lap."He might have died and you wouldn't know the difference," said Ron indisgust. "I tried to turn him yellow yesterday to make him moreinteresting, but the spell didn't work. I'll show you, look..."He rummaged around in his trunk and pulled out a very battered-lookingwand. It was chipped in places and something white was glinting at theend."Unicorn hair's nearly poking out. AnywayHe had just raised his 'wand when the compartment door slid open again.The toadless boy was back, but this time he had a girl with him. She wasalready wearing her new Hogwarts robes."Has anyone seen a toad? Neville's lost one," she said. She had a bossysort of voice, lots of bushy brown hair, and rather large front teeth."We've already told him we haven't seen it," said Ron, but the girlwasn't listening, she was looking at the wand in his hand."Oh, are you doing magic? Let's see it, then."She sat down. Ron looked taken aback."Er -- all right."He cleared his throat."Sunshine, daisies, butter mellow, Turn this stupid, fat rat yellow."




84He waved his wand, but nothing happened. Scabbers stayed gray and fastasleep."Are you sure that's a real spell?" said the girl. "Well, it's not verygood, is it? I've tried a few simple spells just for practice and it'sall worked for me. Nobody in my family's magic at all, it was ever sucha surprise when I got my letter, but I was ever so pleased, of course, Imean, it's the very best school of witchcraft there is, I've heard --I've learned all our course books by heart, of course, I just hope itwill be enough -- I'm Hermione Granger, by the way, who are you.She said all this very fast.Harry looked at Ron, and was relieved to see by his stunned face that hehadn't learned all the course books by heart either."I'm Ron Weasley," Ron muttered."Harry Potter," said Harry."Are you really?" said Hermione. "I know all about you, of course -- Igot a few extra books. for background reading, and you're in ModernMagical History and The Rise and Fall of the Dark Arts and GreatWizarding Events of the Twentieth Century."Am I?" said Harry, feeling dazed."Goodness, didn't you know, I'd have found out everything I could if itwas me," said Hermione. "Do either of you know what house you'll be in?I've been asking around, and I hope I'm in Gryffindor, it sounds by farthe best; I hear Dumbledore himself was in it, but I suppose Ravenclawwouldn't be too bad.... Anyway, we'd better go and look for Neville'stoad. You two had better change, you know, I expect we'll be theresoon."And she left, taking the toadless boy with her."Whatever house I'm in, I hope she's not in it," said Ron. He threw hiswand back into his trunk. "Stupid spell -- George gave it to me, bet heknew it was a dud.""What house are your brothers in?" asked Harry.




85"Gryffindor," said Ron. Gloom seemed to be settling on him again. "Momand Dad were in it, too. I don't know what they'll say if I'm not. Idon't suppose Ravenclaw would be too bad, but imagine if they put me inSlytherin.""That's the house Vol-, I mean, You-Know-Who was in?""Yeah," said Ron. He flopped back into his seat, looking depressed."You know, I think the ends of Scabbers' whiskers are a bit lighter,"said Harry, trying to take Ron's mind off houses. "So what do youroldest brothers do now that they've left, anyway?"Harry was wondering what a wizard did once he'd finished school."Charlie's in Romania studying dragons, and Bill's in Africa doingsomething for Gringotts," said Ron. "Did you hear aboutGringotts? It's been all over the Daily Prophet, but I don't suppose youget that with the Muggles -- someone tried to rob a high securityvault."Harry stared."Really? What happened to them?""Nothing, that's why it's such big news. They haven't been caught. Mydad says it must've been a powerful Dark wizard to get round Gringotts,but they don't think they took anything, that's what's odd. 'Course,everyone gets scared when something like this happens in caseYou-Know-Who's behind it."Harry turned this news over in his mind. He was starting to get aprickle of fear every time You- Know-Who was mentioned. He supposed thiswas all part of entering the magical world, but it had been a lot morecomfortable saying "Voldemort" without worrying."What's your Quidditch team?" Ron asked."Er -- I don't know any," Harry confessed."What!" Ron looked dumbfounded. "Oh, you wait, it's the best game in the




86world --" And he was off, explaining all about the four balls and thepositions of the seven players, describing famous games he'd been towith his brothers and the broomstick he'd like to get if he had themoney. He was just taking Harry through the finer points of the gamewhen the compartment door slid open yet again, but it wasn't Neville thetoadless boy, or Hermione Granger this time.Three boys entered, and Harry recognized the middle one at once: it wasthe pale boy from Madam Malkin's robe shop. He was looking at Harry witha lot more interest than he'd shown back in Diagon Alley."Is it true?" he said. "They're saying all down the train that HarryPotter's in this compartment. So it's you, is it?""Yes," said Harry. He was looking at the other boys. Both of them werethickset and looked extremely mean. Standing on either side of the paleboy, they looked like bodyguards."Oh, this is Crabbe and this is Goyle," said the pale boy carelessly,noticing where Harry was looking. "And my name's Malfoy, Draco Malfoy."Ron gave a slight cough, which might have been hiding a snigget. DracoMalfoy looked at him."Think my name's funny, do you? No need to ask who you are. My fathertold me all the Weasleys have red hair, freckles, and more children thanthey can afford."He turned back to Harry. "You'll soon find out some wizarding familiesare much better than others, Potter. You don't want to go making friendswith the wrong sort. I can help you there."He held out his hand to shake Harry's, but Harry didn't take it."I think I can tell who the wrong sort are for myself, thanks," he saidcoolly.Draco Malfoy didn't go red, but a pink tinge appeared in his palecheeks."I'd be careful if I were you, Potter," he said slowly. "Unless you're abit politer you'll go the same way as your parents. They didn't knowwhat was good for them, either. You hang around with riffraff like the




87Weasleys and that Hagrid, and it'll rub off on you."Both Harry and Ron stood up."Say that again," Ron said, his face as red as his hair."Oh, you're going to fight us, are you?" Malfoy sneered."Unless you get out now," said Harry, more bravely than he felt, becauseCrabbe and Goyle were a lot bigger than him or Ron."But we don't feet like leaving, do we, boys? We've eaten all our foodand you still seem to have some."Goyle reached toward the Chocolate Frogs next to Ron - Ron leaptforward, but before he'd so much as touched Goyle, Goyle let out ahorrible yell.Scabbers the rat was hanging off his finger, sharp little teeth sunkdeep into Goyle's knuckle - Crabbe and Malfoy backed away as Goyle swungScabbers round and round, howling, and when Scabbets finally flew offand hit the window, all three of them disappeared at once. Perhaps theythought there were more rats lurking among the sweets, or perhaps they'dheard footsteps, because a second later, Hermione Granger had come in."What has been going on?" she said, looking at the sweets all over thefloor and Ron picking up Scabbers by his tail.I think he's been knocked out," Ron said to Harry. He looked closer atScabbers. "No -- I don't believe it -- he's gone back to sleep-"And so he had."You've met Malfoy before?"Harry explained about their meeting in Diagon Alley."I've heard of his family," said Ron darkly. "They were some of thefirst to come back to our side after You-Know-Who disappeared. Saidthey'd been bewitched. My dad doesn't believe it. He says Malfoy'sfather didn't need an excuse to go over to the Dark Side." He turned toHermione. "Can we help you with something?"




88"You'd better hurry up and put your robes on, I've just been up to thefront to ask the conductor, and he says we're nearly there. You haven'tbeen fighting, have you? You'll be in trouble before we even get there!""Scabbers has been fighting, not us," said Ron, scowling at her. "Wouldyou mind leaving while we change?""All right -- I only came in here because people outside are behavingvery childishly, racing up and down the corridors," said Hermione in asniffy voice. "And you've got dirt on your nose, by the way, did youknow?"Ron glared at her as she left. Harry peered out of the window. It wasgetting dark. He could see mountains and forests under a deep purplesky. The train did seem to be slowing down.He and Ron took off their jackets and pulled on their long black robes.Ron's were a bit short for him, you could see his sneakers underneaththem.A voice echoed through the train: "We will be reaching Hogwarts in fiveminutes' time. Please leave your luggage on the train, it will be takento the school separately."Harry's stomach lurched with nerves and Ron, he saw, looked pale underhis freckles. They crammed their pockets with the last of the sweets andjoined the crowd thronging the corridor.The train slowed right down and finally stopped. People pushed their waytoward the door and out on to a tiny, dark platform. Harry shivered inthe cold night air. Then a lamp came bobbing over the heads of thestudents, and Harry heard a familiar voice: "Firs' years! Firs' yearsover here! All right there, Harry?"Hagrid's big hairy face beamed over the sea of heads."C'mon, follow me -- any more firs' years? Mind yer step, now! Firs'years follow me!"Slipping and stumbling, they followed Hagrid down what seemed to be asteep, narrow path. It was so dark on either side of them that Harrythought there must be thick trees there. Nobody spoke much. Neville, theboy who kept losing his toad, sniffed once or twice.




89"Ye' all get yer firs' sight o' Hogwarts in a sec," Hagrid called overhis shoulder, "jus' round this bend here."There was a loud "Oooooh!"The narrow path had opened suddenly onto the edge of a great black take.Perched atop a high mountain on the other side, its windows sparkling inthe starry sky, was a vast castle with many turrets and towers."No more'n four to a boat!" Hagrid called, pointing to a fleet of littleboats sitting in the water by the shore. Harry and Ron were followedinto their boat by Neville and Hermione. "Everyone in?" shouted Hagrid,who had a boat to himself. "Right then -- FORWARD!"And the fleet of little boats moved off all at once, gliding across thelake, which was as smooth as glass. Everyone was silent, staring up atthe great castle overhead. It towered over them as they sailed nearerand nearer to the cliff on which it stood."Heads down!" yelled Hagrid as the first boats reached the cliff; theyall bent their heads and the little boats carried them through a curtainof ivy that hid a wide opening in the cliff face. They were carriedalong a dark tunnel, which seemed to be taking them right underneath thecastle, until they reached a kind of underground harbor, where theyclambered out onto rocks and pebbles."Oy, you there! Is this your toad?" said Hagrid, who was checking theboats as people climbed out of them."Trevor!" cried Neville blissfully, holding out his hands. Then theyclambered up a passageway in the rock after Hagrid's lamp, coming out atlast onto smooth, damp grass right in the shadow of the castle.They walked up a flight of stone steps and crowded around the huge, Oakfront door."Everyone here? You there, still got yer toad?"Hagrid raised a gigantic fist and knocked three times on the castledoor.




90CHAPTER SEVENTHE SORTING HATThe door swung open at once. A tall, black-haired witch in emerald-greenrobes stood there. She had a very stern face and Harry's first thoughtwas that this was not someone to cross."The firs' years, Professor McGonagall," said Hagrid."Thank you, Hagrid. I will take them from here."She pulled the door wide. The entrance hall was so big you could havefit the whole of the Dursleys' house in it. The stone walls were litwith flaming torches like the ones at Gringotts, the ceiling was toohigh to make out, and a magnificent marble staircase facing them led tothe upper floors.They followed Professor McGonagall across the flagged stone floor. Harrycould hear the drone of hundreds of voices from a doorway to the right-the rest of the school must already be here -- but Professor McGonagallshowed the first years into a small, empty chamber off the hall. Theycrowded in, standing rather closer together than they would usually havedone, peering about nervously."Welcome to Hogwarts," said Professor McGonagall. "The start-of-termbanquet will begin shortly, but before you take your seats in the GreatHall, you will be sorted into your houses. The Sorting is a veryimportant ceremony because, while you are here, your house will besomething like your family within Hogwarts. You will have classes withthe rest of your house, sleep in your house dormitory, and spend freetime in your house common room."The four houses are called Gryffindor, Hufflepuff, Ravenclaw, andSlytherin. Each house has its own noble history and each has producedoutstanding witches and wizards. While you are at Hogwarts, yourtriumphs will earn your house points, while any rulebreaking will losehouse points. At the end of the year, the house with the most points isawarded the house cup, a great honor. I hope each of you will be acredit to whichever house becomes yours."The Sorting Ceremony will take place in a few minutes in front of therest of the school. I suggest you all smarten yourselves up as much as




91you can while you are waiting."Her eyes lingered for a moment on Neville's cloak, which was fastenedunder his left ear, and on Ron's smudged nose. Harry nervously tried toflatten his hair."I shall return when we are ready for you," said Professor McGonagall."Please wait quietly."She left the chamber. Harry swallowed."How exactly do they sort us into houses?" he asked Ron."Some sort of test, I think. Fred said it hurts a lot, but I think hewas joking."Harry's heart gave a horrible jolt. A test? In front of the wholeschool? But he didn't know any magic yet -- what on earth would he haveto do? He hadn't expected something like this the moment they arrived.He looked around anxiously and saw that everyone else looked terrified,too. No one was talking much except Hermione Granger, who was whisperingvery fast about all the spells she'd learned and wondering which oneshe'd need. Harry tried hard not to listen to her. He'd never been morenervous, never, not even when he'd had to take a school report home tothe Dursleys saying that he'd somehow turned his teacher's wig blue. Hekept his eyes fixed on the door. Any second now, Professor McGonagallwould come back and lead him to his doom.Then something happened that made him jump about a foot in the air --several people behind him screamed."What the --?"He gasped. So did the people around him. About twenty ghosts had juststreamed through the back wall. Pearly-white and slightly transparent,they glided across the room talking to one another and hardly glancingat the first years. They seemed to be arguing. What looked like a fatlittle monk was saying: "Forgive and forget, I say, we ought to give hima second chance --""My dear Friar, haven't we given Peeves all the chances he deserves? Hegives us all a bad name and you know, he's not really even a ghost -- Isay, what are you all doing here?"




92A ghost wearing a ruff and tights had suddenly noticed the first years.Nobody answered."New students!" said the Fat Friar, smiling around at them. "About to beSorted, I suppose?"A few people nodded mutely."Hope to see you in Hufflepuff!" said the Friar. "My old house, youknow.""Move along now," said a sharp voice. "The Sorting Ceremony's about tostart."Professor McGonagall had returned. One by one, the ghosts floated awaythrough the opposite wall."Now, form a line," Professor McGonagall told the first years, "andfollow me."Feeling oddly as though his legs had turned to lead, Harry got into linebehind a boy with sandy hair, with Ron behind him, and they walked outof the chamber, back across the hall, and through a pair of double doorsinto the Great Hall.Harry had never even imagined such a strange and splendid place. It waslit by thousands and thousands of candles that were floating in midairover four long tables, where the rest of the students were sitting.These tables were laid with glittering golden plates and goblets. At thetop of the hall was another long table where the teachers were sitting.Professor McGonagall led the first years up here, so that they came to ahalt in a line facing the other students, with the teachers behind them.The hundreds of faces staring at them looked like pale lanterns in theflickering candlelight. Dotted here and there among the students, theghosts shone misty silver. Mainly to avoid all the staring eyes, Harrylooked upward and saw a velvety black ceiling dotted with stars. HeheardHermione whisper, "Its bewitched to look like the sky outside. I readabout it in Hogwarts, A History."




93It was hard to believe there was a ceiling there at all, and that theGreat Hall didn't simply open on to the heavens.Harry quickly looked down again as Professor McGonagall silently placeda four-legged stool in front of the first years. On top of the stool sheput a pointed wizard's hat. This hat was patched and frayed andextremely dirty. Aunt Petunia wouldn't have let it in the house.Maybe they had to try and get a rabbit out of it, Harry thought wildly,that seemed the sort of thing -- noticing that everyone in the hall wasnow staring at the hat, he stared at it, too. For a few seconds, therewas complete silence. Then the hat twitched. A rip near the brim openedwide like a mouth -- and the hat began to sing:"Oh, you may not think I'm pretty,But don't judge on what you see,I'll eat myself if you can findA smarter hat than me.You can keep your bowlers black,Your top hats sleek and tall,For I'm the Hogwarts Sorting HatAnd I can cap them all.There's nothing hidden in your headThe Sorting Hat can't see,So try me on and I will tell youWhere you ought to be.You might belong in Gryffindor,Where dwell the brave at heart,Their daring, nerve, and chivalry Set Gryffindors apart;




94You might belong in Hufflepuff,Where they are just and loyal,Those patient Hufflepuffis are true And unafraid of toil;Or yet in wise old Ravenclaw,if you've a ready mind,Where those of wit and learning,Will always find their kind;Or perhaps in SlytherinYou'll make your real friends,Those cunning folk use any meansTo achieve their ends.So put me on! Don't be afraid!And don't get in a flap!You're in safe hands (though I have none)For I'm a Thinking Cap!"The whole hall burst into applause as the hat finished its song. Itbowed to each of the four tables and then became quite still again."So we've just got to try on the hat!" Ron whispered to Harry. "I'llkill Fred, he was going on about wrestling a troll."Harry. smiled weakly. Yes, trying on the hat was a lot better thanhaving to do a spell, but he did wish they could have tried it onwithout everyone watching. The hat seemed to be asking rather alot;Harry didn't feel brave or quick-witted or any of it at the moment. Ifonly the hat had mentioned a house for people who felt a bit queasy,that would have been the one for him.




95Professor McGonagall now stepped forward holding a long roll ofparchment."When I call your name, you will put on the hat and sit on the stool tobe sorted," she said. "Abbott, Hannah!"A pink-faced girl with blonde pigtails stumbled out of line, put on thehat, which fell right down over her eyes, and sat down. A moments pause--"HUFFLEPUFF!" shouted the hat.The table on the right cheered and clapped as Hannah went to sit down atthe Hufflepuff table. Harry saw the ghost of the Fat Friar wavingmerrily at her."Bones, Susan!""HUFFLEPUFF!" shouted the hat again, and Susan scuttled off to sit nextto Hannah."Boot, Terry!""RAVENCLAW!"The table second from the left clapped this time; several Ravenclawsstood up to shake hands with Terry as he joined them." Brocklehurst, Mandy" went to Ravenclaw too, but "Brown, Lavender"became the first new Gryffindor, and the table on the far left explodedwith cheers; Harry could see Ron's twin brothers catcalling."Bulstrode, Millicent" then became a Slytherin. Perhaps it was Harry'simagination, after all he'd heard about Slytherin, but he thought theylooked like an unpleasant lot. He was starting to feel definitely sicknow. He remembered being picked for teams during gym at his old school.He had always been last to be chosen, not because he was no good, butbecause no one wanted Dudley to think they liked him."Finch-Fletchley, Justin!""HUFFLEPUFF!"




96Sometimes, Harry noticed, the hat shouted out the house at once, but atothers it took a little while to decide. "Finnigan, Seamus," thesandy-haired boy next to Harry in the line, sat on the stool for almosta whole minute before the hat declared him a Gryffindor."Granger, Hermione!"Hermione almost ran to the stool and jammed the hat eagerly on her head."GRYFFINDOR!" shouted the hat. Ron groaned.A horrible thought struck Harry, as horrible thoughts always do whenyou're very nervous. What if he wasn't chosen at all? What if he justsat there with the hat over his eyes for ages, until ProfessorMcGonagall jerked it off his head and said there had obviously been amistake and he'd better get back on the train?When Neville Longbottom, the boy who kept losing his toad, was called,he fell over on his way to the stool. The hat took a long time to decidewith Neville. When it finally shouted, "GRYFFINDOR," Neville ran offstill wearing it, and had to jog back amid gales of laughter to give itto "MacDougal, Morag."Malfoy swaggered forward when his name was called and got his wish atonce: the hat had barely touched his head when it screamed, "SLYTHERIN!"Malfoy went to join his friends Crabbe and Goyle, looking pleased withhimself.There weren't many people left now. "Moon" "Nott" "Parkinson" then apair of twin girls, "Patil" and "Patil" then "Perks, Sally-Anne" andthen, at last -- "Potter, Harry!"As Harry stepped forward, whispers suddenly broke out like littlehissing fires all over the hall."Potter, did she say?"The Harry Potter?"The last thing Harry saw before the hat dropped over his eyes was thehall full of people craning to get a good look at him. Next second he




97was looking at the black inside of the hat. He waited.Hmm," said a small voice in his ear. "Difficult. Very difficult. Plentyof courage, I see. Not a bad mind either. There's talent, A my goodness,yes -- and a nice thirst to prove yourself, now that's interesting....So where shall I put you?"Harry gripped the edges of the stool and thought, Not Slytherin, notSlytherin."Not Slytherin, eh?" said the small voice. "Are you sure? You could begreat, you know, it's all here in your head, and Slytherin will help youon the way to greatness, no doubt about that -- no? Well, if you're sure-- better be GRYFFINDOR!"Harry heard the hat shout the last word to the whole hall. He took offthe hat and walked shakily toward the Gryffindor table. He was sorelieved to have been chosen and not put in Slytherin, he hardly noticedthat he was getting the loudest cheer yet. Percy the Prefect got up andshook his hand vigorously, while the Weasley twins yelled, "We gotPotter! We got Potter!" Harry sat down opposite the ghost in the ruffhe'd seen earlier. The ghost patted his arm, giving Harry the sudden,horrible feeling he'd just plunged it into a bucket of ice-cold water.He could see the High Table properly now. At the end nearest him satHagrid, who caught his eye and gave him the thumbs up. Harry grinnedback. And there, in the center of the High Table, in a large gold chair,sat Albus Dumbledore. Harry recognized him at once from the card he'dgotten out of the Chocolate Frog on the train. Dumbledore's silver hairwas the only thing in the whole hall that shone as brightly as theghosts. Harry spotted Professor Quirtell, too, the nervous young manfrom the Leaky Cauldron. He was looking very peculiar in a large purpleturban.And now there were only three people left to be sorted. "Thomas, Dean,"a Black boy even taller than Ron, joined Harry at the Gryffindor table."Turpin, Lisa," became a Ravenclaw and then it was Ron's turn. He waspale green by now. Harry crossed his fingers under the table and asecond later the hat had shouted, "GRYFFINDOR!"Harry clapped loudly with the rest as Ron collapsed into the chair nextto him.




98"Well done, Ron, excellent," said Percy Weasley Pompously across Harryas "Zabini, Blaise," was made a Slytherin. Professor McGonagall rolledup her scroll and took the Sorting Hat away.Harry looked down at his empty gold plate. He had only just realized howhungry he was. The pumpkin pasties seemed ages ago.Albus Dumbledore had gotten to his feet. He was beaming at the students,his arms opened wide, as if nothing could have pleased him more than tosee them all there."Welcome," he said. "Welcome to a new year at Hogwarts! Before we beginour banquet, I would like to say a few words. And here they are: Nitwit!Blubber! Oddment! Tweak!"Thank you!"He sat back down. Everybody clapped and cheered. Harry didn't knowwhether to laugh or not."Is he -- a bit mad?" he asked Percy uncertainly."Mad?" said Percy airily. "He's a genius! Best wizard in the world! Buthe is a bit mad, yes. Potatoes, Harry?"Harry's mouth fell open. The dishes in front of him were now piled withfood. He had never seen so many things he liked to eat on one table:roast beef, roast chicken, pork chops and lamb chops, sausages, baconand steak, boiled potatoes, roast potatoes, fries, Yorkshire pudding,peas, carrots, gravy, ketchup, and, for some strange reason, pepperminthumbugs.The Dursleys had never exactly starved Harry, but he'd never beenallowed to eat as much as he liked. Dudley had always taken anythingthat Harry really wanted, even if It made him sick. Harry piled hisplate with a bit of everything except the peppermints and began to eat.It was all delicious."That does look good," said the ghost in the ruff sadly, watching Harrycut up his steak,"Can't you --?"




99I haven't eaten for nearly four hundred years," said the ghost. "I don'tneed to, of course, but one does miss it. I don't think I've in troducedmyself? Sir Nicholas de Mimsy-Porpington at your service. Resident ghostof Gryffindor Tower.""I know who you are!" said Ron suddenly. "My brothers told me about you-- you're Nearly Headless Nick!""I would prefer you to call me Sir Nicholas de Mimsy --" the ghost beganstiffly, but sandy-haired Seamus Finnigan interrupted."Nearly Headless? How can you be nearly headless?"Sir Nicholas looked extremely miffed, as if their little chat wasn'tgoing at all the way he wanted."Like this," he said irritably. He seized his left ear and pulled. Hiswhole head swung off his neck and fell onto his shoulder as if it was ona hinge. Someone had obviously tried to behead him, but not done itproperly. Looking pleased at the stunned looks on their faces, NearlyHeadless Nick flipped his head back onto his neck, coughed, and said,"So -- new Gryffindors! I hope you're going to help us win the housechampionship this year? Gryffindors have never gone so long withoutwinning. Slytherins have got the cup six years in a row! The BloodyBaron's becoming almost unbearable -- he's the Slytherin ghost."Harry looked over at the Slytherin table and saw a horrible ghostsitting there, with blank staring eyes, a gaunt face, and robes stainedwith silver blood. He was right next to Malfoy who, Harry was pleased tosee, didn't look too pleased with the seating arrangements."How did he get covered in blood?" asked Seamus with great interest."I've never asked," said Nearly Headless Nick delicately.When everyone had eaten as much as they could, the remains of the foodfaded from the plates, leaving them sparkling clean as before. A momentlater the desserts appeared. Blocks of ice cream in every flavor youcould think of, apple pies, treacle tarts, chocolate eclairs and jamdoughnuts, trifle, strawberries, Jell-O, rice pudding -- "As Harry helped himself to a treacle tart, the talk turned to theirfamilies.




100"I'm half-and-half," said Seamus. "Me dad's a Muggle. Mom didn't tellhim she was a witch 'til after they were married. Bit of a nasty shockfor him."The others laughed."What about you, Neville?" said Ron."Well, my gran brought me up and she's a witch," said Neville, "but thefamily thought I was all- Muggle for ages. My Great Uncle Algie kepttrying to catch me off my guard and force some magic out of me -- hepushed me off the end of Blackpool pier once, I nearly drowned -- butnothing happened until I was eight. Great Uncle Algie came round fordinner, and he was hanging me out of an upstairs window by the ankleswhen my Great Auntie Enid offered him a meringue and he accidentally letgo. But I bounced -- all the way down the garden and into the road. Theywere all really pleased, Gran was crying, she was so happy. And youshould have seen their faces when I got in here -- they thought I mightnot be magic enough to come, you see. Great Uncle Algie was so pleasedhe bought me my toad."On Harry's other side, Percy Weasley and Hermione were talking aboutlessons ("I do hope they start right away, there's so much to learn, I'mparticularly interested in Transfiguration, you know, turning somethinginto something else, of course, it's supposed to be very difficult-";"You'll be starting small, just matches into needles and that sort ofthing -- ").Harry, who was starting to feel warm and sleepy, looked up atthe High Table again. Hagrid was drinking deeply from his goblet.Professor McGonagall was talking to Professor Dumbledore. ProfessorQuirrell, in his absurd turban, was talking to a teacher with greasyblack hair, a hooked nose, and sallow skin.It happened very suddenly. The hook-nosed teacher looked past Quirrell'sturban straight into Harry's eyes -- and a sharp, hot pain shot acrossthe scar on Harry's forehead."Ouch!" Harry clapped a hand to his head."What is it?" asked Percy.




101"N-nothing."The pain had gone as quickly as it had come. Harder to shake off was thefeeling Harry had gotten from the teacher's look -- a feeling that hedidn't like Harry at all."Who's that teacher talking to Professor Quirrell?" he asked Percy."Oh, you know Quirrell already, do you? No wonder he's looking sonervous, that's Professor Snape. He teaches Potions, but he doesn't wantto -- everyone knows he's after Quirrell's job. Knows an awful lot aboutthe Dark Arts, Snape."Harry watched Snape for a while, but Snape didn't look at him again.At last, the desserts too disappeared, and Professor Dumbledore got tohis feet again. The hall fell silent."Ahern -- just a few more words now that we are all fed and watered. Ihave a few start-of-term notices to give you."First years should note that the forest on the grounds is forbidden toall pupils. And a few of our older students would do well to rememberthat as well."Dumbledore's twinkling eyes flashed in the direction of the Weasleytwins."I have also been asked by Mr. Filch, the caretaker, to remind you allthat no magic should be used between classes in the corridors."Quidditch trials will be held in the second week of the term. Anyoneinterested in playing for their house teams should contact Madam Hooch."And finally, I must tell you that this year, the third-floor corridoron the right-hand side is out of bounds to everyone who does not wish todie a very painful death."Harry laughed, but he was one of the few who did."He's not serious?" he muttered to Percy.




102"Must be," said Percy, frowning at Dumbledore. "It's odd, because heusually gives us a reason why we're not allowed to go somewhere -- theforest's full of dangerous beasts, everyone knows that. I do think hemight have told us prefects, at least.""And now, before we go to bed, let us sing the school song!" criedDumbledore. Harry noticed that the other teachers' smiles had becomerather fixed.Dumbledore gave his wand a little flick, as if he was trying to get afly off the end, and a long golden ribbon flew out of it, which rosehigh above the tables and twisted itself, snakelike, into words."Everyone pick their favorite tune," said Dumbledore, "and off we go!"And the school bellowed:"Hogwarts, Hogwarts, Hoggy Warty Hogwarts,Teach us something please,Whether we be old and baldOr young with scabby knees,Our heads could do with fillingWith some interesting stuff,For now they're bare and full of air,Dead flies and bits of fluff,So teach us things worth knowing,Bring back what we've forgot,just do your best, we'll do the rest,And learn until our brains all rot.Everybody finished the song at different times. At last, only theWeasley twins were left singing along to a very slow funeral march.Dumbledore conducted their last few lines with his wand and when they




103had finished, he was one of those who clapped loudest."Ah, music," he said, wiping his eyes. "A magic beyond all we do here!And now, bedtime. Off you trot!"The Gryffindor first years followed Percy through the chattering crowds,out of the Great Hall, and up the marble staircase. Harry's legs werelike lead again, but only because he was so tired and full of food. Hewas too sleepy even to be surprised that the people in the portraitsalong the corridors whispered and pointed as they passed, or that twicePercy led them through doorways hidden behind sliding panels and hangingtapestries. They climbed more staircases, yawning and dragging theirfeet, and Harry was just wondering how much farther they had to go whenthey came to a sudden halt.A bundle of walking sticks was floating in midair ahead of them, and asPercy took a step toward them they started throwing themselves at him."Peeves," Percy whispered to the first years. "A poltergeist." He raisedhis voice, "Peeves -- show yourself"A loud, rude sound, like the air being let out of a balloon, answered."Do you want me to go to the Bloody Baron?"There was a pop, and a little man with wicked, dark eyes and a widemouth appeared, floating cross- legged in the air, clutching the walkingsticks."Oooooooh!" he said, with an evil cackle. "Ickle Firsties! What fun!"He swooped suddenly at them. They all ducked."Go away, Peeves, or the Baron'll hear about this, I mean it!" barkedPercy.Peeves stuck out his tongue and vanished, dropping the walking sticks onNeville's head. They heard him zooming away, rattling coats of armor ashe passed."You want to watch out for Peeves," said Percy, as they set off again."The Bloody Baron's the only one who can control him, he won't evenlisten to us prefects. Here we are."




104At the very end of the corridor hung a portrait of a very fat woman in apink silk dress."Password?" she said. "Caput Draconis," said Percy, and the portraitswung forward to reveal a round hole in the wall. They all scrambledthrough it -- Neville needed a leg up -- and found themselves in theGryffindor common room, a cozy, round room full of squashy armchairs.Percy directed the girls through one door to their dormitory and theboys through another. At the top of a spiral staircase -- they wereobviously in one of the towers -- they found their beds at last: fivefour-posters hung with deep red, velvet curtains. Their trunks hadalready been brought up. Too tired to talk much, they pulled on theirpajamas and fell into bed." Great food, isn't it?" Ron muttered to Harry through the hangings."Get off, Scabbers! He's chewing my sheets."Harry was going to ask Ron if he'd had any of the treacle tart, but hefell asleep almost at once.Perhaps Harry had eaten a bit too much, because he had a very strangedream. He was wearing Professor Quirrell's turban, which kept talking tohim, telling him he must transfer to Slytherin at once, because it washis destiny. Harry told the turban he didn't want to be in Slytherin; itgot heavier and heavier; he tried to pull it off but it tightenedpainfully -- and there was Malfoy, laughing at him as he struggled withit -then Malfoy turned into the hook-nosed teacher, Snape, whose laughbecame high and cold -- there was a burst of green light and Harry woke,sweating and shaking.He rolled over and fell asleep again, and when he woke next day, hedidn't remember the dream at all.CHAPTER EIGHTTHE POTIONS MASTERThere, look.""Where?"




105"Next to the tall kid with the red hair.""Wearing the glasses?""Did you see his face?""Did you see his scar?"Whispers followed Harry from the moment he left his dormitory the nextday. People lining up outside classrooms stood on tiptoe to get a lookat him, or doubled back to pass him in the corridors again, staring.Harry wished they wouldn't, because he was trying to concentrate onfinding his way to classes.There were a hundred and forty-two staircases at Hogwarts: wide,sweeping ones; narrow, rickety ones; some that led somewhere differenton a Friday; some with a vanishing step halfway up that you had toremember to jump. Then there were doors that wouldn't open unless youasked politely, or tickled them in exactly the right place, and doorsthat weren't really doors at all, but solid walls just pretending. Itwas also very hard to remember where anything was, because it all seemedto move around a lot. The people in the portraits kept going to visiteach other, and Harry was sure the coats of armor could walk.The ghosts didn't help, either. It was always a nasty shock when one ofthem glided suddenly through a door you were trying to open. NearlyHeadless Nick was always happy to point new Gryffindors in the rightdirection, but Peeves the Poltergeist was worth two locked doors and atrick staircase if you met him when you were late for class. He woulddrop wastepaper baskets on your head, pull rugs from under your feet,pelt you with bits of chalk, or sneak up behind you, invisible, grabyour nose, and screech, "GOT YOUR CONK!"Even worse than Peeves, if that was possible, was the caretaker, ArgusFilch. Harry and Ron managed to get on the wrong side of him on theirvery first morning. Filch found them trying to force their way through adoor that unluckily turned out to be the entrance to the out-of-boundscorridor on the third floor. He wouldn't believe they were lost, wassure they were trying to break into it on purpose, and was threateningto lock them in the dungeons when they were rescued by ProfessorQuirrell, who was passing.




106Filch owned a cat called Mrs. Norris, a scrawny, dust-colored creaturewith bulging, lamp like eyes just like Filch's. She patrolled thecorridors alone. Break a rule in front of her, put just one toe out ofline, and she'd whisk off for Filch, who'd appear, wheezing, two secondslater. Filch knew the secret passageways of the school better thananyone (except perhaps the Weasley twins) and could pop up as suddenlyas any of the ghosts. The students all hated him, and it was the dearestambition of many to give Mrs. Norris a good kick.And then, once you had managed to find them, there were the classesthemselves. There was a lot more to magic, as Harry quickly found out,than waving your wand and saying a few funny words.They had to study the night skies through their telescopes everyWednesday at midnight and learn the names of different stars and themovements of the planets. Three times a week they went out to thegreenhouses behind the castle to study Herbology, with a dumpy littlewitch called Professor Sprout, where they learned how to take care ofall the strange plants and fungi, and found out what they were used for.Easily the most boring class was History of Magic, which was the onlyone taught by a ghost. Professor Binns had been very oldindeed when he had fallen asleep in front of the staff room fire and gotup next morning to teach, leaving his body behind him. Binns droned onand on while they scribbled down names and dates, and got Emetic theEvil and Uric the Oddball mixed up.Professor Flitwick, the Charms teacher, was a tiny little wizard who hadto stand on a pile of books to see over his desk. At the start of theirfirst class he took the roll call, and when he reached Harry's name hegave an excited squeak and toppled out of sight.Professor McGonagall was again different. Harry had been quite right tothink she wasn't a teacher to cross. Strict and clever, she gave them atalking-to the moment they sat down in her first class."Transfiguration is some of the most complex and dangerous magic youwill learn at Hogwarts," she said. "Anyone messing around in my classwill leave and not come back. You have been warned."Then she changed her desk into a pig and back again. They were all veryimpressed and couldn't wait to get started, but soon realized they




107weren't going to be changing the furniture into animals for a long time.After taking a lot of complicated notes, they were each given a matchand started trying to turn it into a needle. By the end of the lesson,only Hermione Granger had made any difference to her match; ProfessorMcGonagall showed the class how it had gone all silver and pointy andgave Hermione a rare smile.The class everyone had really been looking forward to was DefenseAgainst the Dark Arts, but Quirrell's lessons turned out to be a bit ofa joke. His classroom smelled strongly of garlic, which everyone saidwas to ward off a vampire he'd met in Romania and was afraid would becoming back to get him one of these days. His turban, he told them, hadbeen given to him by an African prince as a thank-you for getting rid ofa troublesome zombie, but they weren't sure they believed this story.For one thing, when Seamus Finnigan asked eagerly to hear how Quirrellhad fought off the zombie, Quirrell went pink and started talking aboutthe weather; for another, they had noticed that a funny smell hungaround the turban, and the Weasley twins insisted that it was stuffedfull of garlic as well, so that Quirrell was protected wherever he went.Harry was very relieved to find out that he wasn't miles behind everyoneelse. Lots of people had come from Muggle families and, like him, hadn'thad any idea that they were witches and wizards. There was so much tolearn that even people like Ron didn't have much of a head start.Friday was an important day for Harry and Ron. They finally managed tofind their way down to the Great Hall for breakfast without getting lostonce."What have we got today?" Harry asked Ron as he poured sugar on hisporridge."Double Potions with the Slytherins," said Ron. "Snape's Head ofSlytherin House. They say he always favors them -- we'll be able to seeif it's true.""Wish McGonagall favored us, " said Harry. Professor McGonagall was headof Gryffindor House, but it hadn't stopped her from giving them a hugepile of homework the day before.Just then, the mail arrived. Harry had gotten used to this by now, butit had given him a bit of a shock on the first morning, when about ahundred owls had suddenly streamed into the Great Hall during breakfast,




108circling the tables until they saw their owners, and dropping lettersand packages onto their laps.Hedwig hadn't brought Harry anything so far. She sometimes flew in tonibble his ear and have a bit of toast before going off to sleep in theowlery with the other school owls. This morning, however, she fluttereddown between the marmalade and the sugar bowl and dropped a note ontoHarry's plate. Harry tore it open at once. It said, in a very untidyscrawl:Dear Harry,I know you get Friday afternoons off, so would you like to come and havea cup of tea with me around three?I want to hear all about your first week. Send us an answer back withHedwig.HagridHarry borrowed Ron's quill, scribbled Yes, please, see you later on theback of the note, and sent Hedwig off again.It was lucky that Harry had tea with Hagrid to look forward to, becausethe Potions lesson turned out to be the worst thing that had happened tohim so far.At the start-of-term banquet, Harry had gotten the idea that ProfessorSnape disliked him. By the end of the first Potions lesson, he knew he'dbeen wrong. Snape didn't dislike Harry -- he hated him.Potions lessons took place down in one of the dungeons. It was colderhere than up in the main castle, and would have been quite creepy enoughwithout the pickled animals floating in glass jars all around the walls.Snape, like Flitwick, started the class by taking the roll call, andlike Flitwick, he paused at Harry's name."Ah, Yes," he said softly, "Harry Potter. Our new -- celebrity."Draco Malfoy and his friends Crabbe and Goyle sniggered behind their




109hands. Snape finished calling the names and looked up at the class. Hiseyes were black like Hagrid's, but they had none of Hagrid's warmth.They were cold and empty and made you think of dark tunnels."You are here to learn the subtle science and exact art ofpotionmaking," he began. He spoke in barely more than a whisper, butthey caught every word -- like Professor McGonagall, Snape had y caughtevery word -- like Professor McGonagall, Snape had the gift of keeping aclass silent without effort. "As there is little foolish wand-wavinghere, many of you will hardly believe this is magic. I don't expect youwill really understand the beauty of the softly simmering cauldron withits shimmering fumes, the delicate power of liquids that creep throughhuman veins, bewitching the mind, ensnaring the senses.... I can teachyou how to bottle fame, brew glory, even stopper death -- if you aren'tas big a bunch of dunderheads as I usually have to teach."More silence followed this little speech. Harry and Ron exchanged lookswith raised eyebrows. Hermione Granger was on the edge of her seat andlooked desperate to start proving that she wasn't a dunderhead."Potter!" said Snape suddenly. "What would I get if I added powderedroot of asphodel to an infusion of wormwood?"Powdered root of what to an infusion of what? Harry glanced at Ron, wholooked as stumped as he was; Hermione's hand had shot into the air."I don't know, sit," said Harry.Snape's lips curled into a sneer."Tut, tut -- fame clearly isn't everything."He ignored Hermione's hand."Let's try again. Potter, where would you look if I told you to find mea bezoar?"Hermione stretched her hand as high into the air as it would go withouther leaving her seat, but Harry didn't have the faintest idea what abezoar was. He tried not to look at Malfoy, Crabbe, and Goyle, who wereshaking with laughter."I don't know, sit." "Thought you wouldn't open a book before coming,




110eh, Potter?" Harry forced himself to keep looking straight into thosecold eyes. He had looked through his books at the Dursleys', but didSnape expect him to remember everything in One Thousand Magical Herbsand Fungi?Snape was still ignoring Hermione's quivering hand."What is the difference, Potter, between monkshood and wolfsbane?"At this, Hermione stood up, her hand stretching toward the dungeonceiling."I don't know," said Harry quietly. "I think Hermione does, though, whydon't you try her?"A few people laughed; Harry caught Seamus's eye, and Seamus winked.Snape, however, was not pleased."Sit down," he snapped at Hermione. "For your information, Potter,asphodel and wormwood make a sleeping potion so powerful it is known asthe Draught of Living Death. A bezoar is a stone taken from the stomachof a goat and it will save you from most poisons. As for monkshood andwolfsbane, they are the same plant, which also goes by the name ofaconite. Well? Why aren't you all copying that down?"There was a sudden rummaging for quills and parchment. Over the noise,Snape said, "And a point will be taken from Gryffindor House for yourcheek, Potter."Things didn't improve for the Gryffindors as the Potions lessoncontinued. Snape put them all into pairs and set them to mixing up asimple potion to cure boils. He swept around in his long black cloak,watching them weigh dried nettles and crush snake fangs, criticizingalmost everyone except Malfoy, whom he seemed to like. He was justtelling everyone to look at the perfect way Malfoy had stewed his hornedslugs when clouds of acid green smoke and a loud hissing filled thedungeon. Neville had somehow managed to melt Seamus's cauldron into atwisted blob, and their potion was seeping across the stone floor,burning holes in people's shoes. Within seconds, the whole class wasstanding on their stools while Neville, who had been drenched in thepotion when the cauldron collapsed, moaned in pain as angry red boilssprang up all over his arms and legs.




111"Idiot boy!" snarled Snape, clearing the spilled potion away with onewave of his wand. "I suppose you added the porcupine quills beforetaking the cauldron off the fire?"Neville whimpered as boils started to pop up all over his nose."Take him up to the hospital wing," Snape spat at Seamus. Then herounded on Harry and Ron, who had been working next to Neville."You -- Potter -- why didn't you tell him not to add the quills? Thoughthe'd make you look good if he got it wrong, did you? That's anotherpoint you've lost for Gryffindor."This was so unfair that Harry opened his mouth to argue, but Ron kickedhim behind their cauldron."Doi* push it," he muttered, "I've heard Snape can turn very nasty."As they climbed the steps out of the dungeon an hour later, Harry's mindwas racing and his spirits were low. He'd lost two points for Gryffindorin his very first week -- why did Snape hate him so much? "Cheer up,"said Ron, "Snape's always taking points off Fred and George. Can I comeand meet Hagrid with you?"At five to three they left the castle and made their way across thegrounds. Hagrid lived in a small wooden house on the edge of theforbidden forest. A crossbow and a pair of galoshes were outside thefront door.When Harry knocked they heard a frantic scrabbling from inside andseveral booming barks. Then Hagrid's voice rang out, saying, "Back, Fang-- back."Hagrid's big, hairy face appeared in the crack as he pulled the dooropen."Hang on," he said. "Back, Fang."He let them in, struggling to keep a hold on the collar of an enormousblack boarhound.There was only one room inside. Hams and pheasants were hanging from theceiling, a copper kettle was boiling on the open fire, and in the corner




112stood a massive bed with a patchwork quilt over it."Make yerselves at home," said Hagrid, letting go of Fang, who boundedstraight at Ron and started licking his ears. Like Hagrid, Fang wasclearly not as fierce as he looked."This is Ron," Harry told Hagrid, who was pouring boiling water into alarge teapot and putting rock cakes onto a plate."Another Weasley, eh?" said Hagrid, glancing at Ron's freckles. I spenthalf me life chasin' yer twin brothers away from the forest."The rock cakes were shapeless lumps with raisins that almost broke theirteeth, but Harry and Ron pretended to be enjoying them as they toldHagrid all about their first -lessons. Fang rested his head on Harry'sknee and drooled all over his robes.Harry and Ron were delighted to hear Hagrid call Fitch "that old git.""An' as fer that cat, Mrs. Norris, I'd like ter introduce her to Fangsometime. D'yeh know, every time I go up ter the school, she follows meeverywhere? Can't get rid of her -- Fitch puts her up to it."Harry told Hagrid about Snape's lesson. Hagrid, like Ron, told Harry notto worry about it, that Snape liked hardly any of the students."But he seemed to really hate me.""Rubbish!" said Hagrid. "Why should he?"Yet Harry couldn't help thinking that Hagrid didn't quite meet his eyeswhen he said that."How's yer brother Charlie?" Hagrid asked Ron. "I liked him a lot --great with animals."Harry wondered if Hagrid had changed the subject on purpose. While Rontold Hagrid all about Charlie's work with dragons, Harry picked up apiece of paper that was lying on the table under the tea cozy. It was acutting from the Daily Prophet:GRINGOTTS BREAK-IN LATEST




113Investigations continue into the break-in at Gringotts on 31 July,widely believed to be the work of Dark wizards or witches unknown.Gringotts goblins today insisted that nothing had been taken. The vaultthat was searched had in fact been emptied the same day."But we're not telling you what was in there, so keep your noses out ifyou know what's good for you," said a Gringotts spokesgoblin thisafternoon.Harry remembered Ron telling him on the train that someone had tried torob Gringotts, but Ron hadn't mentioned the date."Hagrid!" said Harry, "that Gringotts break-in happened on my birthday!It might've been happening while we were there!"There was no doubt about it, Hagrid definitely didn't meet Harry's eyesthis time. He grunted and offered him another rock cake. Harry read thestory again. The vault that was searched had in fact been emptiedearlier that same day. Hagrid had emptied vault seven hundred andthirteen, if you could call it emptying, taking out that grubby littlepackage. Had that been what the thieves were looking for?As Harry and Ron walked back to the castle for dinner, their pocketsweighed down with rock cakes they'd been too polite to refuse, Harrythought that none of the lessons he'd had so far had given him as muchto think about as tea with Hagrid. Had Hagrid collected that packagejust in time? Where was it now? And did Hagrid know something aboutSnape that he didn't want to tell Harry?CHAPTER NINETHE MIDNIGHT DUELHarry had never believed he would meet a boy he hated more than Dudley,but that was before he met Draco Malfoy.Still, first-yearGryffindors only had Potions with the Slytherins, so they didn't have toput up with Malfoy much. Or at least, they didn't until they spotted anotice pinned up in the Gryffindor common room that made them all groan.Flying lessons would be starting on Thursday -- and Gryffindor andSlytherinwould be learning together.




114"Typical," said Harry darkly. "Just what I always wanted. To make a foolof myself on a broomstick in front of Malfoy."He had been looking forward to learning to fly more than anything else."You don't know that you'll make a fool of yourself," said Ronreasonably. "Anyway, I know Malfoy's always going on about how good heis at Quidditch, but I bet that's all talk."Malfay certainly did talk about flying a lot. He complained loudly aboutfirst years never getting on the house Quidditch teams and told long,boastful stories that always seemed to end with him narrowly escapingMuggles in helicopters. He wasn't the only one, though: the way SeamusFinnigan told it, he'd spent most of his childhood zooming around thecountryside on his broomstick. Even Ron would tell anyone who'd listenabout the time he'd almost hit a hang glider on Charlie's old broom.Everyone from wizarding families talked about Quidditch constantly. Ronhad already had a big argument with Dean Thomas, who shared theirdormitory, about soccer. Ron couldn't see what was exciting about a gamewith only one ball where no one was allowed to fly. Harry had caught Ronprodding Dean's poster of West Ham soccer team, trying to make theplayers move.Neville had never been on a broomstick in his life, because hisgrandmother had never let him near one. Privately, Harry felt she'd hadgood reason, because Neville managed to have an extraordinary number ofaccidents even with both feet on the ground.Hermione Granger was almost as nervous about flying as Neville was. Thiswas something you couldn't learn by heart out of a book -- not that shehadn't tried. At breakfast on Thursday she bored them all stupid withflying tips she'd gotten out of a library book called Quidditch Throughthe Ages. Neville was hanging on to her every word, desperate foranything that might help him hang on to his broomstick later, buteverybody else was very pleased when Hermione's lecture was interruptedby the arrival of the mail.Harry hadn't had a single letter since Hagrid's note, something thatMalfoy had been quick to notice, of course. Malfoy's eagle owl wasalways bringing him packages of sweets from home, which he openedgloatingly at the Slytherin table.A barn owl brought Neville a small package from his grandmother. He




115opened it excitedly and showed them a glass ball the size of a largemarble, which seemed to be full of white smoke."It's a Remembrall!" he explained. "Gran knows I forget things -- thistells you if there's something you've forgotten to do. Look, you hold ittight like this and if it turns red -- oh..." His face fell, because theRemembrall had suddenly glowed scarlet,"You've forgotten something..."Neville was trying to remember what he'd forgotten when Draco Malfoy,who was passing the Gryffindor table, snatched the Remembrall out of hishand.Harry and Ron jumped to their feet. They were half hoping for a reasonto fight Malfay, but Professor McGonagall, who could spot troublequicker than any teacher in the school, was there in a flash."What's going on?""Malfoy's got my Remembrall, Professor."Scowling, Malfoy quickly dropped the Remembrall back on the table."Just looking," he said, and he sloped away with Crabbe and Goyle behindhim.At three-thirty that afternoon, Harry, Ron, and the other Gryffindorshurried down the front steps onto the grounds for their first flyinglesson. It was a clear, breezy day, and the grass rippled under theirfeet as they marched down the sloping lawns toward a smooth, flat lawnon the opposite side of the grounds to the forbidden forest, whose treeswere swaying darkly in the distance.The Slytherins were already there, and so were twenty broomsticks lyingin neat lines on the ground. Harry had heard Fred and George Weasleycomplain about the school brooms, saying that some of them started tovibrate if you flew too high, or always flew slightly to the left.Their teacher, Madam Hooch, arrived. She had short, gray hair, andyellow eyes like a hawk."Well, what are you all waiting for?" she barked. "Everyone stand by a




116broomstick. Come on, hurry up."Harry glanced down at his broom. It was old and some of the twigs stuckout at odd angles."Stick out your right hand over your broom," called Madam Hooch at thefront, "and say 'Up!"'"UPF everyone shouted.Harry's broom jumped into his hand at once, but it was one of the fewthat did. Hermione Granger's had simply rolled over on the ground, andNeville's hadn't moved at all. Perhaps brooms, like horses, could tellwhen you were afraid, thought Harry; there was a quaver in Neville'svoice that said only too clearly that he wanted to keep his feet on theground.Madam Hooch then showed them how to mount their brooms without slidingoff the end, and walked up and down the rows correcting their grips.Harry and Ron were delighted when she told Malfoy he'd been doing itwrong for years."Now, when I blow my whistle, you kick off from the ground, hard," saidMadam Hooch. "Keep your brooms steady, rise a few feet, and then comestraight back down by leaning forward slightly. On my whistle -- three-- two --"But Neville, nervous and jumpy and frightened of being left on theground, pushed off hard before the whistle had touched Madam Hooch'slips."Come back, boy!" she shouted, but Neville was rising straight up like acork shot out of a bottle -- twelve feet -- twenty feet. Harry saw hisscared white face look down at the ground falling away, saw him gasp,slip sideways off the broom and --WHAM -- a thud and a nasty crack and Neville lay facedown on the grassin a heap. His broomstick was still rising higher and higher, andstarted to drift lazily toward the forbidden forest and out of sight.Madam Hooch was bending over Neville, her face as white as his."Broken wrist," Harry heard her mutter. "Come on, boy -- it's all right,




117up you get.".She turned to the rest of the class."None of you is to move while I take this boy to the hospital wing! Youleave those brooms where they are or you'll be out of Hogwarts beforeyou can say 'Quidditch.' Come on, dear."Neville, his face tear-streaked, clutching his wrist, hobbled off withMadam Hooch, who had her arm around him.No sooner were they out of earshot than Malfoy burst into laughter."Did you see his face, the great lump?"The other Slytherins joined in."Shut up, Malfoy," snapped Parvati Patil."Ooh, sticking up for Longbottom?" said Pansy Parkinson, a hard-facedSlytherin girl. "Never thought you'd like fat little crybabies,Parvati.""Look!" said Malfoy, darting forward and snatching something out of thegrass. "It's that stupid thing Longbottom's gran sent him."The Remembrall glittered in the sun as he held it up."Give that here, Malfoy," said Harry quietly. Everyone stopped talkingto watch.Malfoy smiled nastily."I think I'll leave it somewhere for Longbottom to find -- how about --up a tree?""Give it here!" Harry yelled, but Malfoy had leapt onto his broomstickand taken off. He hadn't been lying, he could fly well. Hovering levelwith the topmost branches of an oak he called, "Come and get it,Potter!"Harry grabbed his broom.




118"No!" shouted Hermione Granger. "Madam Hooch told us not to move --you'll get us all into trouble."Harry ignored her. Blood was pounding in his ears. He mounted the broomand kicked hard against the ground and up, up he soared; air rushedthrough his hair, and his robes whipped out behind him -and in a rush offierce joy he realized he'd found something he could do without beingtaught -- this was easy, this was wonderful. He pulled his broomstick upa little to take it even higher, and heard screams and gasps of girlsback on the ground and an admiring whoop from Ron.He turned his broomstick sharply to face Malfoy in midair. Malfoy lookedstunned."Give it here," Harry called, "or I'll knock you off that broom!" "Oh,yeah?" said Malfoy, trying to sneer, but looking worried.Harry knew, somehow, what to do. He leaned forward and grasped the broomtightly in both hands, and it shot toward Malfay like a javelin. Malfoyonly just got out of the way in time; Harry made a sharp about-face andheld the broom steady. A few people below were clapping."No Crabbe and Goyle up here to save your neck, Malfoy," Harry called.The same thought seemed to have struck Malfoy."Catch it if you can, then!" he shouted, and he threw the glass ballhigh into the air and streaked back toward the ground.Harry saw, as though in slow motion, the ball rise up in the air andthen start to fall. He leaned forward and pointed his broom handle down-- next second he was gathering speed in a steep dive, racing the ball-- wind whistled in his ears, mingled with the screams of peoplewatching -- he stretched out his hand -- a foot from the ground hecaught it, just in time to pull his broom straight, and he toppledgently onto the grass with the Remembrall clutched safely in his fist."HARRY POTTER!"His heart sank faster than he'd just dived. Professor McGonagall wasrunning toward them. He got to his feet, trembling."Never -- in all my time at Hogwarts --"




119Professor McGonagall was almost speechless with shock, and her glassesflashed furiously, "-- how dare you -- might have broken your neck --""It wasn't his fault, Professor --""Be quiet, Miss Patil"But Malfoy --""That's enough, Mr. Weasley. Potter, follow me, now."Harry caught sight of Malfoy, Crabbe, and Goyle's triumphant faces as heleft, walking numbly in Professor McGonagall's wake as she strode towardthe castle. He was going to be expelled, he just knew it. He wanted tosay something to defend himself, but there seemed to be something wrongwith his voice. Professor McGonagall was sweeping along without evenlooking at him; he had to jog to keep up. Now he'd done it. He hadn'teven lasted two weeks. He'd be packing his bags in ten minutes. Whatwould the Dursleys say when he turned up on the doorstep?Up the front steps, up the marble staircase inside, and still ProfessorMcGonagall didn't say a word to him. She wrenched open doors and marchedalong corridors with Harry trotting miserably behind her. Maybe she wastaking him to Dumbledore. He thought of Hagrid, expelled but allowed tostay on as gamekeeper. Perhaps he could be Hagrid's assistant. Hisstomach twisted as he imagined it, watching Ron and the others becomingwizards, while he stumped around the grounds carrying Hagrid's bag.Professor McGonagall stopped outside a classroom. She opened the doorand poked her head inside."Excuse me, Professor Flitwick, could I borrow Wood for a moment?"Wood? thought Harry, bewildered; was Wood a cane she was going to use onhim?But Wood turned out to be a person, a burly fifth-year boy who came outof Flitwicles class looking confused."Follow me, you two," said Professor McGonagall, and they marched on upthe corridor, Wood looking curiously at Harry.




120"In here."Professor McGonagall pointed them into a classroom that was empty exceptfor Peeves, who was busy writing rude words on the blackboard."Out, Peeves!" she barked. Peeves threw the chalk into a bin, whichclanged loudly, and he swooped out cursing. Professor McGonagall slammedthe door behind him and turned to face the two boys."Potter, this is Oliver Wood. Wood -- I've found you a Seeker."Wood's expression changed from puzzlement to delight."Are you serious, Professor?""Absolutely," said Professor McGonagall crisply. "The boy's a natural.I've never seen anything like it. Was that your first time on abroomstick, Potter?"Harry nodded silently. He didn't have a clue what was going on, but hedidn't seem to be being expelled, and some of the feeling started comingback to his legs."He caught that thing in his hand after a fifty-foot dive," ProfessorMcGonagall told Wood. "Didn't even scratch himself. Charlie Weasleycouldn't have done it."Wood was now looking as though all his dreams had come true at once."Ever seen a game of Quidditch, Potter?" he asked excitedly."Wood's captain of the Gryffindor team," Professor McGonagall explained."He's just the build for a Seeker, too," said Wood, now walking aroundHarry and staring at him. "Light -- speedy -- we'll have to get him adecent broom, Professor -- a Nimbus Two Thousand or a Cleansweep Seven,I'd say."I shall speak to Professor Dumbledore and see if we can't bend thefirst-year rule. Heaven knows, we need a better team than last year.Flattened in that last match by Slytherin, I couldn't look Severus Snapein the face for weeks...."




121Professor McGonagall peered sternly over her glasses at Harry."I want to hear you're training hard, Potter, or I may change my mindabout punishing you."Then she suddenly smiled."Your father would have been proud," she said. "He was an excellentQuidditch player himself.""You're joking."It was dinnertime. Harry had just finished telling Ron what had happenedwhen he'd left the grounds with Professor McGonagall. Ron had a piece ofsteak and kidney pie halfway to his mouth, but he'd forgotten all aboutit."Seeker?" he said. "But first years never -- you must be the youngesthouse player in about a century, said Harry, shoveling pie into hismouth. He felt particularly hungry after the excitement of theafternoon. "Wood told me."Ron was so amazed, so impressed, he just sat and gaped at Harry."I start training next week," said Harry. "Only don't tell anyone, Woodwants to keep it a secret."Fred and George Weasley now came into the hall, spotted Harry, andhurried over."Well done," said George in a low voice. "Wood told us. We're on theteam too -- Beaters.""I tell you, we're going to win that Quidditch cup for sure this year,"said Fred. "We haven't won since Charlie left, but this year's team isgoing to be brilliant. You must be good, Harry, Wood was almost skippingwhen he told us.""Anyway, we've got to go, Lee Jordan reckons he's found a new secretpassageway out of the school.""Bet it's that one behind the statue of Gregory the Smarmy that we foundin our first week. See you."




122Fred and George had hardly disappeared when someone far less welcometurned up: Malfoy, flanked by Crabbe and Goyle."Having a last meal, Potter? When are you getting the train back to theMuggles?""You're a lot braver now that you're back on the ground and you've gotyour little friends with you," said Harry coolly. There was of coursenothing at all little about Crabbe and Goyle, but as the High Table wasfull of teachers, neither of them could do more than crack theirknuckles and scowl."I'd take you on anytime on my own," said Malfoy. "Tonight, if you want.Wizard's duel. Wands only -- no contact. What's the matter? Never heardof a wizard's duel before, I suppose?""Of course he has," said Ron, wheeling around. "I'm his second, who'syours?"Malfoy looked at Crabbe and Goyle, sizing them up."Crabbe," he said. "Midnight all right? We'll meet you in the trophyroom; that's always unlocked."When Malfoy had gone, Ron and Harry looked at each other. "What is awizard's duel?" said Harry. "And what do you mean, you're my second?""Well, a second's there to take over if you die," said Ron casually,getting started at last on his cold pie. Catching the look on Harry'sface, he added quickly, "But people only die in proper duels, you know,with real wizards. The most you and Malfoy'll be able to do is sendsparks at each other. Neither of you knows enough magic to do any realdamage. I bet he expected you to refuse, anyway.""And what if I wave my wand and nothing happens?""Throw it away and punch him on the nose," Ron suggested. "Excuse me."They both looked up. It was Hermione Granger."Can't a person eat in peace in this place?" said Ron.




123Hermione ignored him and spoke to Harry."I couldn't help overhearing what you and Malfoy were saying --""Bet you could," Ron muttered."--and you mustn't go wandering around the school at night, think of thepoints you'll lose Gryffindor if you're caught, and you're bound to be.It's really very selfish of you.""And it's really none of your business," said Harry."Good-bye," said Ron.All the same, it wasn't what you'd call the perfect end to the day,Harry thought, as he lay awake much later listening to Dean and Seamusfalling asleep (Neville wasn't back from the hospital wing). Ron hadspent all evening giving him advice such as "If he tries to curse you,you'd better dodge it, because I can't remember how to block them."There was a very good chance they were going to get caught by Filch orMrs. Norris, and Harry felt he was pushing his luck, breaking anotherschool rule today. On the other hand, Malfoys sneering face kept loomingup out of the darkness - this was his big chance to beat Malfoyface-to-face. He couldn't miss it."Half-past eleven," Ron muttered at last, "we'd better go."They pulled on their bathrobes, picked up their wands, and crept acrossthe tower room, down the spiral staircase, and into the Gryffindorcommon room. A few embers were still glowing in the fireplace, turningall the armchairs into hunched black shadows. They had almost reachedthe portrait hole when a voice spoke from the chair nearest them, "Ican't believe you're going to do this, Harry."A lamp flickered on. It was Hermione Granger, wearing a pink bathrobeand a frown."You!" said Ron furiously. "Go back to bed!""I almost told your brother," Hermione snapped, "Percy -- he's aprefect, he'd put a stop to this."Harry couldn't believe anyone could be so interfering.




124"Come on," he said to Ron. He pushed open the portrait of the Fat Ladyand climbed through the hole.Hermione wasn't going to give up that easily. She followed Ron throughthe portrait hole, hissing at them like an angry goose."Don't you care about Gryffindor, do you only care about yourselves, Idon't want Slytherin to win the house cup, and you'll lose all thepoints I got from Professor McGonagall for knowing about SwitchingSpells.""Go away." "All right, but I warned you, you just remember what I saidwhen you're on the train home tomorrow, you're so --"But what they were, they didn't find out. Hermione had turned to theportrait of the Fat Lady to get back inside and found herself facing anempty painting. The Fat Lady had gone on a nighttime visit and Hermionewas locked out of Gryffindor tower."Now what am I going to do?" she asked shrilly."That's your problem," said Ron. "We've got to go, we 3 re going to belate."They hadn't even reached the end of the corridor when Hermione caught upwith them."I'm coming with you," she said."You are not.""D'you think I'm going to stand out here and wait for Filch to catch me?If he finds all three of us I'll tell him the truth, that I was tryingto stop you, and you can back me up.""You've got some nerve --" said Ron loudly."Shut up, both of you!" said Harry sharply. I heard something."It was a sort of snuffling."Mrs. Norris?" breathed Ron, squinting through the dark.




125It wasn't Mrs. Norris. It was Neville. He was curled up on the floor,fast asleep, but jerked suddenly awake as they crept nearer."Thank goodness you found me! I've been out here for hours, I couldn'tremember the new password to get in to bed.""Keep your voice down, Neville. The password's 'Pig snout' but it won'thelp you now, the Fat Lady's gone off somewhere.""How's your arm?" said Harry."Fine," said Neville, showing them. "Madam Pomfrey mended it in about aminute.""Good - well, look, Neville, we've got to be somewhere, we'll see youlater --""Don't leave me!" said Neville, scrambling to his feet, "I don't want tostay here alone, the Bloody Baron's been past twice already."Ron looked at his watch and then glared furiously at Hermione andNeville."If either of you get us caught, I'll never rest until I've learned thatCurse of the Bogies Quirrell told us about, and used it on you.Hermione opened her mouth, perhaps to tell Ron exactly how to use theCurse of the Bogies, but Harry hissed at her to be quiet and beckonedthem all forward.They flitted along corridors striped with bars of moonlight from thehigh windows. At every turn Harry expected to run into Filch or Mrs.Norris, but they were lucky. They sped up a staircase to the third floorand tiptoed toward the trophy room.Malfoy and Crabbe weren't there yet. The crystal trophy cases glimmeredwhere the moonlight caught them. Cups, shields, plates, and statueswinked silver and gold in the darkness. They edged along the walls,keeping their eyes on the doors at either end of the room. Harry tookout his wand in case Malfoy leapt in and started at once. The minutescrept by.




126"He's late, maybe he's chickened out," Ron whispered.Then a noise in the next room made them jump. Harry had only just raisedhis wand when they heard someone speak -and it wasn't Malfoy."Sniff around, my sweet, they might be lurking in a corner."It was Filch speaking to Mrs. Norris. Horror-struck, Harry waved madlyat the other three to follow him as quickly as possible; they scurriedsilently toward the door, away from Filch's voice. Neville's robes hadbarely whipped round the corner when they heard Filch enter the trophyroom."They're in here somewhere," they heard him mutter, "probably hiding.""This way!" Harry mouthed to the others and, petrified, they began tocreep down a long gallery full of suits of armor. They could hear Filchgetting nearer. Neville suddenly let out a frightened squeak and brokeinto a run -he tripped, grabbed Ron around the waist, and the pair ofthem toppled right into a suit of armor.The clanging and crashing were enough to wake the whole castle."RUN!" Harry yelled, and the four of them sprinted down the gallery, notlooking back to see whether Filch was following -- they swung around thedoorpost and galloped down one corridor then another, Harry in the lead,without any idea where they were or where they were going -- they rippedthrough a tapestry and found themselves in a hidden passageway, hurtledalong it and came out near their Charms classroom, which they knew wasmiles from the trophy room."I think we've lost him," Harry panted, leaning against the cold walland wiping his forehead. Neville was bent double, wheezing andspluttering.I -- told -you," Hermione gasped, clutching at the stitch in her chest,"I -- told -- you.""We've got to get back to Gryffindor tower," said Ron, "quickly aspossible.""Malfoy tricked you," Hermione said to Harry. "You realize that, don'tyou? He was never going to meet you -- Filch knew someone was going to




127be in the trophy room, Malfoy must have tipped him off."Harry thought she was probably right, but he wasn't going to tell herthat."Let's go."It wasn't going to be that simple. They hadn't gone more than a dozenpaces when a doorknob rattled and something came shooting out of aclassroom in front of them.It was Peeves. He caught sight of them and gave a squeal of delight."Shut up, Peeves -- please -- you'll get us thrown out."Peeves cackled."Wandering around at midnight, Ickle Firsties? Tut, tut, tut. Naughty,naughty, you'll get caughty.""Not if you don't give us away, Peeves, please.""Should tell Filch, I should," said Peeves in a saintly voice, but hiseyes glittered wickedly. "It's for your own good, you know.""Get out of the way," snapped Ron, taking a swipe at Peeves this was abig mistake."STUDENTS OUT OF BED!" Peeves bellowed, "STUDENTS OUT OF BEDDOWN THECHARMS CORRIDOR"Ducking under Peeves, they ran for their lives, right to the end of thecorridor where they slammed into a door -- and it was locked."This is it!" Ron moaned, as they pushed helplessly at the door, "We'redone for! This is the end!" They could hear footsteps, Filch running asfast as he could toward Peeves's shouts."Oh, move over," Hermione snarled. She grabbed Harry's wand, tapped thelock, and whispered, 'Alohomora!"The lock clicked and the door swung open -- they piled through it, shut




128it quickly, and pressed their ears against it, listening."Which way did they go, Peeves?" Filch was saying. "Quick, tell me.""Say 'please."'"Don't mess with me, Peeves, now where did they go?""Shan't say nothing if you don't say please," said Peeves in hisannoying singsong voice."All right -please.""NOTHING! Ha haaa! Told you I wouldn't say nothing if you didn't sayplease! Ha ha! Haaaaaa!" And they heard the sound of Peeves whooshingaway and Filch cursing in rage."He thinks this door is locked," Harry whispered. "I think we'll be okay-- get off, Neville!" For Neville had been tugging on the sleeve ofHarry's bathrobe for the last minute. "What?"Harry turned around -- and saw, quite clearly, what. For a moment, hewas sure he'd walked into a nightmare -- this was too much, on top ofeverything that had happened so far.They weren't in a room, as he had supposed. They were in a corridor. Theforbidden corridor on the third floor. And now they knew why it wasforbidden.They were looking straight into the eyes of a monstrous dog, a dog thatfilled the whole space between ceiling and floor. It had three heads.Three pairs of rolling, mad eyes; three noses, twitchingand quivering in their direction; three drooling mouths, saliva hangingin slippery ropes from yellowish fangs.It was standing quite still, all six eyes staring at them, and Harryknew that the only reason they weren't already dead was that theirsudden appearance had taken it by surprise, but it was quickly gettingover that, there was no mistaking what those thunderous growls meant.Harry groped for the doorknob -- between Filch and death, he'd takeFilch.




129They fell backward -- Harry slammed the door shut, and they ran, theyalmost flew, back down the corridor. Filch must have hurried off to lookfor them somewhere else, because they didn't see him anywhere, but theyhardly cared -- all they wanted to do was put as much space as possiblebetween them and that monster. They didn't stop running until theyreached the portrait of the Fat Lady on the seventh floor."Where on earth have you all been?" she asked, looking at theirbathrobes hanging off their shoulders and their flushed, sweaty faces."Never mind that -- pig snout, pig snout," panted Harry, and theportrait swung forward. They scrambled into the common room andcollapsed, trembling, into armchairs.It was a while before any of them said anything. Neville, indeed, lookedas if he'd never speak again."What do they think they're doing, keeping a thing like that locked upin a school?" said Ron finally. "If any dog needs exercise, that onedoes."Hermione had got both her breath and her bad temper back again. "Youdon't use your eyes, any of you, do you?" she snapped. "Didn't you seewhat it was standing on."The floor?" Harry suggested. "I wasn't looking at its feet, I was toobusy with its heads.""No, not the floor. It was standing on a trapdoor. It's obviouslyguarding something."She stood up, glaring at them.I hope you're pleased with yourselves. We could all have been killed --or worse, expelled. Now, if you don't mind, I'm going to bed."Ron stared after her, his mouth open."No, we don't mind," he said. "You'd think we dragged her along,wouldn't you.But Hermione had given Harry something else to think about as he climbed




130back into bed. The dog was guarding something.... What had Hagrid said?Gringotts was the safest place in the world for something you wanted tohide -- except perhaps Hogwarts.It looked as though Harry had found out where the grubby littie packagefrom vault seven hundred and thirteen was.CHAPTER TENHALLOWEENMalfoy couldn't believe his eyes when he saw that Harry and Ron werestill at Hogwarts the next day, looking tired but perfectly cheerful.Indeed, by the next morning Harry and Ron thought that meeting thethree-headed dog had been an excellent adventure, and they were quitekeen to have another one. In the meantime, Harry filled Ron in about thepackage that seemed to have been moved from Gringotts to Hogwarts, andthey spent a lot of time wondering what could possibly need such heavyprotection. "It's either really valuable or really dangerous," said Ron."Or both," said Harry.But as all they knew for sure about the mysterious object was that itwas about two inches long, they didn't have much chance of guessing whatit was without further clues.Neither Neville nor Hermione showed the slightest interest in what layunderneath the dog and the trapdoor. All Neville cared about was nevergoing near the dog again.Hermione was now refusing to speak to Harry and Ron, but she was such abossy know-it-all that they saw this as an added bonus. All they reallywanted now was a way of getting back at Malfoy, and to their greatdelight, just such a thing arrived in the mail about a week later.As the owls flooded into the Great Hall as usual, everyone's attentionwas caught at once by a long, thin package carried by six large screechowls. Harry was just as interested as everyone else to see what was inthis large parcel, and was amazed when the owls soared down and droppedit right in front of him, knocking his bacon to the floor. They hadhardly fluttered out of the way when another owl dropped a letter on topof the parcel.




131Harry ripped open the letter first, which was lucky, because it said:DO NOT OPEN THE PARCEL AT THE TABLE.It contains your new Nimbus Two Thousand, but I don't want everybodyknowing you've got a broomstick or they'll all want one. Oliver Woodwill meet you tonight on the Quidditch field at seven o'clock for yourfirst training session.Professor McGonagallHarry had difficulty hiding his glee as he handed the note to Ron toread."A Nimbus Two Thousand!" Ron moaned enviously. "I've never even touchedone."They left the hall quickly, wanting to unwrap the broomstick in privatebefore their first class, but halfway across the entrance hall theyfound the way upstairs barred by Crabbe and Goyle. Malfoy seized thepackage from Harry and felt it."That's a broomstick," he said, throwing it back to Harry with a mixtureof jealousy and spite on his face. "You'll be in for it this time,Potter, first years aren't allowed them."Ron couldn't resist it."It's not any old broomstick," he said, "it's a Nimbus Two Thousand.What did you say you've got at home, Malfoy, a Comet Two Sixty?" Rongrinned at Harry. "Comets look flashy, but they're not in the sameleague as the Nimbus.""What would you know about it, Weasley, you couldn't afford half thehandle," Malfoy snapped back. "I suppose you and your brothers have tosave up twig by twig."Before Ron could answer, Professor Flitwick appeared at Malfoy's elbow."Not arguing, I hope, boys?" he squeaked.




132"Potter's been sent a broomstick, Professor," said Malfoy quickly."Yes, yes, that's right," said Professor Flitwick, beaming at Harry."Professor McGonagall told me all about the special circumstances,Potter. And what model is it?""A Nimbus Two Thousand, sit," said Harry, fighting not to laugh at thelook of horror on Malfoy's face. "And it's really thanks to Malfoy herethat I've got it," he added.Harry and Ron headed upstairs, smothering their laughter at Malfoy'sobvious rage and confusion. "Well, it's true," Harry chortled as theyreached the top of the marble staircase, "If he hadn't stolen Neville'sRemembrall I wouln't be on the team....""So I suppose you think that's a reward for breaking rules?" came anangry voice from just behind them. Hermione was stomping up the stairs,looking disapprovingly at the package in Harry's hand."I thought you weren't speaking to us?" said Harry."Yes, don't stop now," said Ron, "it's doing us so much good."Hermione marched away with her nose in the air.Harry had a lot of trouble keeping his mind on his lessons that day. Itkept wandering up to the dormitory where his new broomstick was lyingunder his bed, or straying off to the Quidditch field where he'd belearning to play that night. He bolted his dinner that evening withoutnoticing what he was eating, and then rushed upstairs with Ron to unwrapthe Nimbus Two Thousand at last."Wow," Ron sighed, as the broomstick rolled onto Harry's bedspread.Even Harry, who knew nothing about the different brooms, thought itlooked wonderful. Sleek and shiny, with a mahogany handle, it had a longtail of neat, straight twigs and Nimbus Two Thousand written in goldnear the top.As seven o'clock drew nearer, Harry left the castle and set off in thedusk toward the Quidditch field. Held never been inside the stadiumbefore. Hundreds of seats were raised in stands around the field so thatthe spectators were high enough to see what was going on. At either end




133of the field were three golden poles with hoops on the end. Theyreminded Harry of the little plastic sticks Mugglechildren blew bubbles through, except that they were fifty feet high.Too eager to fly again to wait for Wood, Harry mounted his broomstickand kicked off from the ground. What a feeling -- he swooped in and outof the goal posts and then sped up and down the field. The Nimbus TwoThousand turned wherever he wanted at his lightest touch."Hey, Potter, come down!'Oliver Wood had arrived. fie was carrying a large wooden crate under hisarm. Harry landed next to him."Very nice," said Wood, his eyes glinting. "I see what McGonagallmeant... you really are a natural. I'm just going to teach you the rulesthis evening, then you'll be joining team practice three times a week."He opened the crate. Inside were four different-sized balls."Right," said Wood. "Now, Quidditch is easy enough to understand, evenif it's not too easy to play. There are seven players on each side.Three of them are called Chasers.""Three Chasers," Harry repeated, as Wood took out a bright red ballabout the size of a soccer ball."This ball's called the Quaffle," said Wood. "The Chasers throw theQuaffle to each other and try and get it through one of the hoops toscore a goal. Ten points every time the Quaffle goes through one of thehoops. Follow me?""The Chasers throw the Quaffle and put it through the hoops to score,"Harry recited. "So -- that's sort of like basketball on broomsticks withsix hoops, isn't it?""What's basketball?" said Wood curiously. "Never mind," said Harryquickly."Now, there's another player on each side who's called the Keeper -I'mKeeper for Gryffindor. I have to fly around our hoops and stop the otherteam from scoring."




134"Three Chasers, one Keeper," said Harry, who was determined to rememberit all. "And they play with the Quaffle. Okay, got that. So what arethey for?" He pointed at the three balls left inside the box."I'll show you now," said Wood. "Take this."He handed Harry a small club, a bit like a short baseball bat."I'm going to show you what the Bludgers do," Wood said. "These two arethe Bludgers."He showed Harry two identical balls, jet black and slightly smaller thanthe red Quaffle. Harry noticed that they seemed to be straining toescape the straps holding them inside the box."Stand back," Wood warned Harry. He bent down and freed one of theBludgers.At once, the black ball rose high in the air and then pelted straight atHarry's face. Harry swung at it with the bat to stop it from breakinghis nose, and sent it zigzagging away into the air -- it zoomed aroundtheir heads and then shot at Wood, who dived on top of it and managed topin it to the ground."See?" Wood panted, forcing the struggling Bludger back into the crateand strapping it down safely. "The Bludgers rocket around, trying toknock players off their brooms. That's why you have two Beaters on eachteam -- the Weasley twins are ours -- it's their job to protect theirside from the Bludgers and try and knock them toward the other team. So-- think you've got all that?""Three Chasers try and score with the Quaffle; the Keeper guards thegoal posts; the Beaters keep the Bludgers away from their team," Harryreeled off."Very good," said Wood."Er -- have the Bludgers ever killed anyone?" Harry asked, hoping hesounded offhand."Never at Hogwarts. We've had a couple of broken jaws but nothing worsethan that. Now, the last member of the team is the




135Seeker. That's you. And you don't have to worry about the Quaffle or theBludgers unless they crack my head open.""Don't worry, the Weasleys are more than a match for the Bludgers -- Imean, they're like a pair of human Bludgers themselves."Wood reached into the crate and took out the fourth and last ball.Compared with the Quaffle and the Bludgers, it was tiny, about the sizeof a large walnut. It was bright gold and had little fluttering silverwings."This," said Wood, "is the Golden Snitch, and it's the most importantball of the lot. It's very hard to catch because it's so fast anddifficult to see. It's the Seeker's job to catch it. You've got to weavein and out of the Chasers, Beaters, Bludgers, and Quaffle to get itbefore the other team's Seeker, because whichever Seeker catches theSnitch wins his team an extra hundred and fifty points, so theynearly always win. That's why Seekers get fouled so much. A game ofQuidditch only ends when the Snitch is caught, so it can go on for ages-- I think the record is three months, they had to keep bringing onsubstitutes so the players could get some sleep. "Well, that's it -- anyquestions?"Harry shook his head. He understood what he had to do all right, it wasdoing it that was going to be the problem."We won't practice with the Snitch yet," said Wood, carefully shuttingit back inside the crate, "it's too dark, we might lose it. Let's tryyou out with a few of these."He pulled a bag of ordinary golf balls out of his pocket and a fewminutes later, he and Harry were up in the air, Wood throwing the golfballs as hard as he could in every direction for Harry to catch.Harry didn't miss a single one, and Wood was delighted. After half anhour, night had really fallen and they couldn't carry on."That Quidditch cup'll have our name on it this year," said Wood happilyas they trudged back up to the castle. "I wouldn't be surprised if youturn out better than Charlie Weasley, and he could have played forEngland if he hadn't gone off chasing dragons."




136Perhaps it was because he was now so busy, what with Quidditch practicethree evenings a week on top of all his homework, but Harry could hardlybelieve it when he realized that he'd already been at Hogwarts twomonths. The castle felt more like home than Privet Drive ever had. Hislessons, too, were becoming more and more interesting now that they hadmastered the basics.On Halloween morning they woke to the delicious smell of baking pumpkinwafting through the corridors. Even better, Professor Flitwick announcedin Charms that he thought they were ready to start making objects fly,something they had all been dying to try since they'd seen him makeNeville's toad zoom around the classroom. Professor Flitwick put theclass into pairs to practice. Harry's partner was Seamus Finnigan (whichwas a relief, because Neville had been trying to catch his eye). Ron,however, was to be working with Hermione Granger. It was hard to tellwhether Ron or Hermione was angrier about this. She hadn't spoken toeither of them since the day Harry's broomstick had arrived."Now, don't forget that nice wrist movement we've been practicing!"squeaked Professor Flitwick, perched on top of his pile of books asusual. "Swish and flick, remember, swish and flick. And saying the magicwords properly is very important, too -- never forget Wizard Baruffio,who said 's' instead of 'f' and found himself on the floor with abuffalo on his chest."It was very difficult. Harry and Seamus swished and flicked, but thefeather they were supposed to be sending skyward just lay on thedesktop. Seamus got so impatient that he prodded it with his wand andset fire to it -- Harry had to put it out with his hat.Ron, at the next table, wasn't having much more luck."Wingardium Leviosa!" he shouted, waving his long arms like a windmill."You're saying it wrong," Harry heard Hermione snap. "It's Wing-gar-diumLevi-o-sa, make the 'gar' nice and long.""You do it, then, if you're so clever," Ron snarled.Hermione rolled up the sleeves of her gown, flicked her wand, and said,"Wingardium Leviosa!"




137Their feather rose off the desk and hovered about four feet above theirheads."Oh, well done!" cried Professor Flitwick, clapping. "Everyone see here,Miss Granger's done it!"Ron was in a very bad mood by the end of the class. "It's no wonder noone can stand her," he said to Harry as they pushed their way into thecrowded corridor, "she's a nightmare, honestly. "Someone knocked into Harry as they hurried past him. It was Hermione.Harry caught a glimpse of her face -- and was startled to see that shewas in tears."I think she heard you.""So?" said Ron, but he looked a bit uncomfortable. "She must've noticedshe's got no friends."Hermione didn't turn up for the next class and wasn't seen allafternoon. On their way down to the Great Hall for the Halloween feast,Harry and Ron overheard Parvati Patil telling her friend Lavender thatHermione was crying in the girls' bathroom and wanted to be left alone.Ron looked still more awkward at this, but a moment later they hadentered the Great Hall, where the Halloween decorations put Hermione outof their minds.A thousand live bats fluttered from the walls and ceiling while athousand more swooped over the tables in low black clouds, making thecandles in the pumpkins stutter. The feast appeared suddenly on thegolden plates, as it had at the start-of-term banquet.Harry was just helping himself to a baked potato when Professor Quirrellcame sprinting into the hall, his turban askew and terror on his face.Everyone stared as he reached Professor Dumbledore's chair, slumpedagainst the table, and gasped, "Troll -- in the dungeons -- thought youought to know."He then sank to the floor in a dead faint.There was an uproar. It took several purple firecrackers exploding fromthe end of Professor Dumbledore's wand to bring silence.




138"Prefects," he rumbled, "lead your Houses back to the dormitoriesimmediately!"Percy was in his element."Follow me! Stick together, first years! No need to fear the troll ifyou follow my orders! Stay close behind me, now. Make way, first yearscoming through! Excuse me, I'm a prefect!""How could a troll get in?" Harry asked as they climbed the stairs."Don't ask me, they're supposed to be really stupid," said Ron. "MaybePeeves let it in for a Halloween joke."They passed different groups of people hurrying in different directions.As they jostled their way through a crowd of confused Hufflepuffs, Harrysuddenly grabbed Ron's arm."I've just thought -- Hermione.""What about her?""She doesn't know about the troll."Ron bit his lip."Oh, all right," he snapped. "But Percy'd better not see us."Ducking down, they joined the Hufflepuffs going the other way, slippeddown a deserted side corridor, and hurried off toward the girls'bathroom. They had just turned the corner when they heard quickfootsteps behind them."Percy!" hissed Ron, pulling Harry behind a large stone griffin.Peering around it, however, they saw not Percy but Snape. He crossed thecorridor and disappeared from view."What's he doing?" Harry whispered. "Why isn't he down in the dungeonswith the rest of the teachers?""Search me."




139Quietly as possible, they crept along the next corridor after Snape'sfading footsteps."He's heading for the third floor," Harry said, but Ron held up hishand."Can you smell something?"Harry sniffed and a foul stench reached his nostrils, a mixture of oldsocks and the kind of public toilet no one seems to clean.And then they heard it -- a low grunting, and the shuffling footfalls ofgigantic feet. Ron pointed -- at the end of a passage to the left,something huge was moving toward them. They shrank into the shadows andwatched as it emerged into a patch of moonlight.It was a horrible sight. Twelve feet tall, its skin was a dull, granitegray, its great lumpy body like a boulder with its small bald headperched on top like a coconut. It had short legs thick as tree trunkswith flat, horny feet. The smell coming from it was incredible. It washolding a huge wooden club, which dragged along the floor because itsarms were so long.The troll stopped next to a doorway and peered inside. It waggled itslong ears, making up its tiny mind, then slouched slowly into the room."The keys in the lock," Harry muttered. "We could lock it in.""Good idea," said Ron nervously.They edged toward the open door, mouths dry, praying the troll wasn'tabout to come out of it. With one great leap, Harry managed to grab thekey, slam the door, and lock it.'Yes!"Flushed with their victory, they started to run back up the passage, butas they reached the corner they heard something that made their heartsstop -- a high, petrified scream -- and it was coming from the chamberthey'd just chained up."Oh, no," said Ron, pale as the Bloody Baron.




140"It's the girls' bathroom!" Harry gasped."Hermione!" they said together.It was the last thing they wanted to do, but what choice did they have?Wheeling around, they sprinted back to the door and turned the key,fumbling in their panic. Harry pulled the door open and they ran inside.Hermione Granger was shrinking against the wall opposite, looking as ifshe was about to faint. The troll was advancing on her, knocking thesinks off the walls as it went."Confuse it!" Harry said desperately to Ron, and, seizing a tap, hethrew it as hard as he could against the wall.The troll stopped a few feet from Hermione. It lumbered around, blinkingstupidly, to see what had made the noise. Its mean little eyes sawHarry. It hesitated, then made for him instead, lifting its club as itwent."Oy, pea-brain!" yelled Ron from the other side of the chamber, and hethrew a metal pipe at it. The troll didn't even seem to notice the pipehitting its shoulder, but it heard the yell and paused again, turningits ugly snout toward Ron instead, giving Harry time to run around it."Come on, run, run!" Harry yelled at Hermione, trying to pull her towardthe door, but she couldn't move, she was still flat against the wall,her mouth open with terror.The shouting and the echoes seemed to be driving the troll berserk. Itroared again and started toward Ron, who was nearest and had no way toescape.Harry then did something that was both very brave and very stupid: Hetook a great running jump and managed to fasten his arms around thetroll's neck from behind. The troll couldn't feel Harry hanging there,but even a troll will notice if you stick a long bit of wood up itsnose, and Harry's wand had still been in his hand when he'd jumped -- ithad gone straight up one of the troll's nostrils.Howling with pain, the troll twisted and flailed its club, with Harryclinging on for dear life; any second, the troll was going to rip him




141off or catch him a terrible blow with the club.Hermione had sunk to the floor in fright; Ron pulled out his own wand --not knowing what he was going to do he heard himself cry the first spellthat came into his head: "Wingardium Leviosa!"The club flew suddenly out of the troll's hand, rose high, high up intothe air, turned slowly over -- and dropped, with a sickening crack, ontoits owner's head. The troll swayed on the spot and then fell flat on itsface, with a thud that made the whole room tremble.Harry got to his feet. He was shaking and out of breath. Ron wasstanding there with his wand still raised, staring at what he had done.It was Hermione who spoke first."Is it -- dead?"I don't think so," said Harry, I think it's just been knocked out."He bent down and pulled his wand out of the troll's nose. It was coveredin what looked like lumpy gray glue."Urgh -- troll boogers."He wiped it on the troll's trousers.A sudden slamming and loud footsteps made the three of them look up.They hadn't realized what a racket they had been making, but of course,someone downstairs must have heard the crashes and the troll's roars. Amoment later, Professor McGonagall had come bursting into the room,closely followed by Snape, with Quirrell bringing up the rear. Quirrelltook one look at the troll, let out a faint whimper, and sat quicklydown on a toilet, clutching his heart.Snape bent over the troll. Professor McGonagall was looking at Ron andHarry. Harry had never seen her look so angry. Her lips were white.Hopes of winning fifty points for Gryffindor faded quickly from Harry'smind."What on earth were you thinking of?" said Professor McGonagall, withcold fury in her voice. Harry looked at Ron, who was still standing withhis wand in the air. "You're lucky you weren't killed. Why aren't you in




142your dormitory?"Snape gave Harry a swift, piercing look. Harry looked at the floor. Hewished Ron would put his wand down.Then a small voice came out of the shadows."Please, Professor McGonagall -- they were looking for me.""Miss Granger!"Hermione had managed to get to her feet at last.I went looking for the troll because I -- I thought I could deal with iton my own -- you know, because I've read all about them."Ron dropped his wand. Hermione Granger, telling a downright lie to ateacher? "If they hadn't found me, I'd be dead now. Harry stuck his wandup its nose and Ron knocked it out with its own club. They didn't havetime to come and fetch anyone. It was about to finish me off when theyarrived."Harry and Ron tried to look as though this story wasn't new to them."Well -- in that case..." said Professor McGonagall, staring at thethree of them, "Miss Granger, you foolish girl, how could you think oftackling a mountain troll on your own?"Hermione hung her head. Harry was speechless. Hermione was the lastperson to do anything against the rules, and here she was, pretendingshe had, to get them out of trouble. It was as if Snape had startedhanding out sweets."Miss Granger, five points will be taken from Gryffindor for this," saidProfessor McGonagall. "I'm very disappointed in you. If you're not hurtat all, you'd better get off to Gryffindor tower. Students are finishingthe feast in their houses."Hermione left.Professor McGonagall turned to Harry and Ron."Well, I still say you were lucky, but not many first years could have




143taken on a full-grown mountain troll. You each win Gryffindor fivepoints. Professor Dumbledore will be informed of this. You may go."They hurried out of the chamber and didn't speak at all until they hadclimbed two floors up. It was a relief to be away from the smell of thetroll, quite apart from anything else."We should have gotten more than ten points," Ron grumbled."Five, you mean, once she's taken off Hermione's.""Good of her to get us out of trouble like that," Ron admitted. "Mindyou, we did save her.""She might not have needed saving if we hadn't locked the thing in withher," Harry reminded him.They had reached the portrait of the Fat Lady."Pig snout," they said and entered.The common room was packed and noisy. Everyone was eating the food thathad been sent up. Hermione, however, stood alone by the door, waitingfor them. There was a very embarrassed pause. Then, none of them lookingat each other, they all said "Thanks," and hurried off to get plates.But from that moment on, Hermione Granger became their friend. There aresome things you can't share without ending up liking each other, andknocking out a twelve-foot mountain troll is one of them.CHAPTER ELEVENQUIDDITCHAs they entered November, the weather turned very cold. The mountainsaround the school became icy gray and the lake like chilled steel. Everymorning the ground was covered in frost. Hagrid could be seen from theupstairs windows defrosting broomsticks on the Quidditch field, bundledup in a long moleskin overcoat, rabbit fur gloves, and enormousbeaverskin boots.The Quidditch season had begun. On Saturday, Harry would be playing in




144his first match after weeks of training: Gryffindor versus Slytherin. IfGryffindor won, they would move up into second place in the housechampionship.Hardly anyone had seen Harry play because Wood had decided that, astheir secret weapon, Harry should be kept, well, secret. But the newsthat he was playing Seeker had leaked out somehow, and Harry didn't knowwhich was worse -- people telling him he'd be brilliant or peopletelling him they'd be running around underneath him holding a mattress.It was really lucky that Harry now had Hermlone as a friend. He didn'tknow how he'd have gotten through all his homework without her, whatwith all the last-minute Quidditch practice Wood was making them do. Shehad also tent him Quidditch Through the Ages, which turned out to be avery interesting read.Harry learned that there were seven hundred ways of committing aQuidditch foul and that all of them had happened during a World Cupmatch in 1473; that Seekers were usually the smallest and fastestplayers, and that most serious Quidditch accidents seemed to happen tothem; that although people rarely died playing Quidditch, referees hadbeen known to vanish and turn up months later in the Sahara Desert.Hermione had become a bit more relaxed about breaking rules since Harryand Ron had saved her from the mountain troll, and she was much nicerfor it. The day before Harry's first Quidditch match the three of themwere out in the freezing courtyard during break, and she had conjuredthem up a bright blue fire that could be carried around in a jam jar.They were standing with their backs to it, getting warm, when Snapecrossed the yard. Harry noticed at once that Snape was limping. Harry,Ron, and Hermione moved closer together to block the fire from view;they were sure it wouldn't be allowed. Unfortunately, something abouttheir guilty faces caught Snape's eye. He limped over. He hadn't seenthe fire, but he seemed to be looking for a reason to tell them offanyway."What's that you've got there, Potter?"It was Quidditch Through the Ages. Harry showed him."Library books are not to be taken outside the school," said Snape."Give it to me. Five points from Gryffindor."




145"He's just made that rule up," Harry muttered angrily as Snape limpedaway. "Wonder what's wrong with his leg?""Dunno, but I hope it's really hurting him," said Ron bitterly.The Gryffindor common room was very noisy that evening. Harry, Ron, andHermione sat together next to a window. Hermione was checking Harry andRon's Charms homework for them. She would never let them copy ("How willyou learn?"), but by asking her to read it through, they got the rightanswers anyway.Harry felt restless. He wanted Quidditch Through the Ages back, to takehis mind off his nerves about tomorrow. Why should he be afraid ofSnape? Getting up, he told Ron and Hermione he was going to ask Snape ifhe could have it."Better you than me," they said together, but Harry had an idea thatSnape wouldn't refuse if there were other teachers listening.He made his way down to the staffroom and knocked. There was no answer.He knocked again. Nothing.Perhaps Snape had left the book in there? It was worth a try. He pushedthe door ajar and peered inside -- and a horrible scene met his eyes.Snape and Filch were inside, alone. Snape was holding his robes abovehis knees. One of his legs was bloody and mangled. Filch was handingSnape bandages."Blasted thing*," Snape was saying. "How are you supposed to keep youreyes on all three heads at once?"Harry tried to shut the door quietly, but --"POTTER!"Snape's face was twisted with fury as he dropped his robes quickly tohide his leg. Harry gulped."I just wondered if I could have my book back.""GET OUT! OUT!"




146Harry left, before Snape could take any more points from Gryffindor. Hesprinted back upstairs."Did you get it?" Ron asked as Harry joined them. "What's the matter?"In a low whisper, Harry told them what he'd seen."You know what this means?" he finished breathlessly. "He tried to getpast that three-headed dog at Halloween! That's where he was going whenwe saw him -- he's after whatever it's guarding! And Id bet mybroomstick he let that troll in, to make a diversion!"Hermione's eyes were wide."No -- he wouldn't, she said. "I know he's not very nice, but hewouldn't try and steal something Dumbledore was keeping safe.""Honestly, Hermione, you think all teachers are saints or something,"snapped Ron. "I'm with Harry. I wouldn't put anything past Snape. Butwhat's he after? What's that dog guarding?"Harry went to bed with his head buzzing with the same question. Nevillewas snoring loudly, but Harry couldn't sleep. He tried to empty his mind-- he needed to sleep, he had to, he had his first Quidditch match in afew hours -- but the expression on Snape's face when Harry had seen hisleg wasn't easy to forget.The next morning dawned very bright and cold. The Great Hall was full ofthe delicious smell of fried sausages and the cheer ful chatter ofeveryone looking forward to a good Quidditch match."You've got to eat some breakfast.""I don't want anything.""Just a bit of toast," wheedled Hermione."I'm not hungry."Harry felt terrible. In an hour's time he'd be walking onto the field."Harry, you need your strength," said Seamus Finnigan. "Seekers arealways the ones who get clobbered by the other team."




147"Thanks, Seamus," said Harry, watching Seamus pile ketchup on hissausages.By eleven o'clock the whole school seemed to be out in the stands aroundthe Quidditch pitch. Many students had binoculars. The seats might beraised high in the air, but it was still difficult to see what was goingon sometimes.Ron and Hermione joined Neville, Seamus, and Dean the West Ham fan up inthe top row. As a surprise for Harry, they had painted a large banner onone of the sheets Scabbers had ruined. It said Potter for President, andDean, who was good at drawing, had done a large Gryffindor lionunderneath. Then Hermione had performed a tricky little charm so thatthe paint flashed different colors.Meanwhile, in the locker room, Harry and the rest of the team werechanging into their scarlet Quidditch robes (Slytherin would be playingin green).Wood cleared his throat for silence."Okay, men," he said."And women," said Chaser Angelina Johnson."And women," Wood agreed. "This is it.""The big one," said Fred Weasley."The one we've all been waiting for," said George."We know Oliver's speech by heart," Fred told Harry, "we were on theteam last year.""Shut up, you two," said Wood. "This is the best team Gryffindor's hadin years. We're going to win. I know it."He glared at them all as if to say, "Or else.""Right. It's time. Good luck, all of you."Harry followed Fred and George out of the locker room and, hoping his




148knees weren't going to give way, walked onto the field to loud cheers.Madam Hooch was refereeing. She stood in the middle of the field waitingfor the two teams, her broom in her hand."Now, I want a nice fair game, all of you," she said, once they were allgathered around her. Harry noticed that she seemed to be speakingparticularly to the Slytherin Captain, Marcus Flint, a sixth year. Harrythought Flint looked as if he had some troll blood in him. Out of thecorner of his eye he saw the fluttering banner high above, flashingPotter for President over the crowd. His heart skipped. He felt braver."Mount your brooms, please."Harry clambered onto his Nimbus Two Thousand.Madam Hooch gave a loud blast on her silver whistle.Fifteen brooms rose up, high, high into the air. They were off. "And theQuaffle is taken immediately by Angelina Johnson of Gryffindor -- whatan excellent Chaser that girl is, and rather attractive, too --""JORDAN!""Sorry, Professor."The Weasley twins' friend, Lee Jordan, was doing the commentary for thematch, closely watched by Professor McGonagall."And she's really belting along up there, a neat pass to Alicia Spinnet,a good find of Oliver Wood's, last year only a reserve -- back toJohnson and -- no, the Slytherins have taken the Quaffle, SlytherinCaptain Marcus Flint gains the Quaffle and off he goes -- Flint flyinglike an eagle up there -- he's going to sc- no, stopped by an excellentmove by Gryffindor Keeper Wood and the Gryffindors take the Quaffle --that's Chaser Katie Bell of Gryffindor there, nice dive around Flint,off up the field and -- OUCH -- that must have hurt, hit in the back ofthe head by a Bludger -- Quaffle taken by the Slytherins -- that'sAdrian Pucey speeding off toward the goal posts, but he's blocked by asecond Bludger -- sent his way by Fred or George Weasley, can't tellwhich -- nice play by the Gryffindor Beater, anyway, and Johnson back inpossession of the Quaffle, a clear field ahead and off she goes -- she'sreally flying -- dodges a speeding Bludger -- the goal posts are ahead




149-- come on, now, Angelina -- Keeper Bletchley dives -- misses --GRYFFINDORS SCORE!"Gryffindor cheers filled the cold air, with howls and moans from theSlytherins."Budge up there, move along.""Hagrid!"Ron and Hermione squeezed together to give Hagrid enough space to jointhem."Bin watchin' from me hut," said Hagrid, patting a large pair ofbinoculars around his neck, "But it isn't the same as bein' in thecrowd. No sign of the Snitch yet, eh?""Nope," said Ron. "Harry hasn't had much to do yet.""Kept outta trouble, though, that's somethin'," said Hagrid, raising hisbinoculars and peering skyward at the speck that was Harry.Way up above them, Harry was gliding over the game, squinting about forsome sign of the Snitch. This was part of his and Wood's game plan."Keep out of the way until you catch sight of the Snitch," Wood hadsaid. "We don't want you attacked before you have to be."When Angelina had scored, Harry had done a couple of loop-the-loops tolet off his feelings. Now he was back to staring around for the Snitch.Once he caught sight of a flash of gold, but it was just a reflectionfrom one of the Weasleys' wristwatches, and once a Bludger decided tocome pelting his way, more like a cannonball than anything, but Harrydodged it and Fred Weasley came chasing after it."All right there, Harry?" he had time to yell, as he beat the Bludgerfuriously toward Marcus Flint."Slytherin in possession," Lee Jordan was saying, "Chaser Pucey duckstwo Bludgers, two Weasleys, and Chaser Bell, and speeds toward the --wait a moment -- was that the Snitch?"A murmur ran through the crowd as Adrian Pucey dropped the Quaffle, too




150busy looking over his shoulder at the flash of gold that had passed hisleft ear.Harry saw it. In a great rush of excitement he dived downward after thestreak of gold. Slytherin Seeker Terence Higgs had seen it, too. Neckand neck they hurtled toward the Snitch -all the Chasers seemed to haveforgotten what they were supposed to be doing as they hung in midair towatch.Harry was faster than Higgs -- he could see the little round ball, wingsfluttering, darting up ahead - - he put on an extra spurt of speed --WHAM! A roar of rage echoed from the Gryffindors below -- Marcus Flinthad blocked Harry on purpose, and Harry's broom spun off course, Harryholding on for dear life."Foul!" screamed the Gryffindors.Madam Hooch spoke angrily to Flint and then ordered a free shot at thegoal posts for Gryffindor. But in all the confusion, of course, theGolden Snitch had disappeared from sight again.Down in the stands, Dean Thomas was yelling, "Send him off, ref! Redcard!""What are you talking about, Dean?" said Ron."Red card!" said Dean furiously. "In soccer you get shown the red cardand you're out of the game!""But this isn't soccer, Dean," Ron reminded him.Hagrid, however, was on Dean's side."They oughta change the rules. Flint coulda knocked Harry outta theair."Lee Jordan was finding it difficult not to take sides."So -- after that obvious and disgusting bit of cheating"Jordan!" growled Professor McGonagall.




151"I mean, after that open and revolting foul'Jordan, I'm warning you --""All right, all right. Flint nearly kills the Gryffindor Seeker, whichcould happen to anyone, I'm sure, so a penalty to Gryffindor, taken bySpinner, who puts it away, no trouble, and we continue play, Gryffindorstill in possession."It was as Harry dodged another Bludger, which went spinning dangerouslypast his head, that it happened. His broom gave a sudden, frighteninglurch. For a split second, he thought he was going to fall. He grippedthe broom tightly with both his hands and knees. He'd never feltanything like that.It happened again. It was as though the broom was trying to buck himoff. But Nimbus Two Thousands did not suddenly decide to buck theirriders off. Harry tried to turn back toward the Gryffindor goal- posts-- he had half a mind to ask Wood to call time-out -- and then herealized that his broom was completely out of his control. He couldn'tturn it. He couldn't direct it at all. It was zigzagging through theair, and every now and then making violent swishing movements thatalmost unseated him.Lee was still commentating."Slytherin in possession -- Flint with the Quaffle -- passes Spinnet --passes Bell -- hit hard in the face by a Bludger, hope it broke his nose-- only joking, Professor -- Slytherins score -- A no...The Slytherins were cheering. No one seemed to have noticed that Harry'sbroom was behaving strangely. It was carrying- him slowly higher, awayfrom the game, jerking and twitching as it went."Dunno what Harry thinks he's doing," Hagrid mumbled. He stared throughhis binoculars. "If I didn' know better, I'd say he'd lost control ofhis broom... but he can't have...."Suddenly, people were pointing up at Harry all over the stands. Hisbroom had started to roll over and over, with him only just managing tohold on. Then the whole crowd gasped. Harry's broom had given a wildjerk and Harry swung off it. He was now dangling from it, holding onwith only one hand.




152"Did something happen to it when Flint blocked him?" Seamus whispered."Can't have," Hagrid said, his voice shaking. "Can't nothing interferewith a broomstick except powerful Dark magic -- no kid could do that toa Nimbus Two Thousand."At these words, Hermione seized Hagrid's binoculars, but instead oflooking up at Harry, she started looking frantically at the crowd."What are you doing?" moaned Ron, gray-faced."I knew it," Hermione gasped, "Snape -- look."Ron grabbed the binoculars. Snape was in the middle of the standsopposite them. He had his eyes fixed on Harry and was muttering nonstopunder his breath."He's doing something -- jinxing the broom," said Hermione."What should we do?""Leave it to me."Before Ron could say another word, Hermione had disappeared. Ron turnedthe binoculars back on Harry. His broom was vibrating so hard, it wasalmost impossible for him to hang on much longer. The whole crowd was onits feet, watching, terrified, as the Weasleys flew up to try and pullHarry safely onto one of their brooms, but it was no good -- every timethey got near him, the broom would jump higher still. They dropped lowerand circled beneath him, obviously hoping to catch him if he fell.MarcusFlint seized the Quaffle and scored five times without anyone noticing."Come on, Hermione," Ron muttered desperately.Hermione had fought her way across to the stand where Snape stood, andwas now racing along the row behind him; she didn't even stop to saysorry as she knocked Professor Quirrell headfirst into the row in front.Reaching Snape, she crouched down, pulled out her wand, and whispered afew, well- chosen words. Bright blue flames shot from her wand onto thehem of Snape's robes.




153It took perhaps thirty seconds for Snape to realize that he was on fire.A sudden yelp told her she had done her job. Scooping the fire off himinto a little jar in her pocket, she scrambled back along the row --Snape would never know what had happened.It was enough. Up in the air, Harry was suddenly able to clamber back onto his broom."Neville, you can look!" Ron said. Neville had been sobbing intoHagrid's jacket for the last five minutes.Harry was speeding toward the ground when the crowd saw him clap hishand to his mouth as though he was about to be sick -- he hit the fieldon all fours -- coughed -- and something gold fell into his hand."I've got the Snitch!" he shouted, waving it above his head, and thegame ended in complete confusion."He didn't catch it, he nearly swallowed it," Flint was still howlingtwenty minutes later, but it made no difference -- Harry hadn't brokenany rules and Lee Jordan was still happily shouting the results --Gryffindor had won by one hundred and seventy points to sixty. Harryheard none of this, though. He was being made a cup of strong tea backin Hagrid's hut, with Ron and Hermione."It was Snape," Ron was explaining, "Hermione and I saw him. He wascursing your broomstick, muttering, he wouldn't take his eyes off you.""Rubbish," said Hagrid, who hadn't heard a word of what had gone on nextto him in the stands. "Why would Snape do somethin' like that?"Harry, Ron, and Hermione looked at one another, wondering what to tellhim. Harry decided on the truth."I found out something about him," he told Hagrid. "He tried to get pastthat three-headed dog on Halloween. It bit him. We think he was tryingto steal whatever it's guarding."Hagrid dropped the teapot."How do you know about Fluffy?" he said.




154"Fluffy?""Yeah -- he's mine -- bought him off a Greek chappie I met in the publas' year -- I lent him to Dumbledore to guard the"Yes?" said Harry eagerly."Now, don't ask me anymore," said Hagrid gruffly. "That's top secret,that is.""But Snape's trying to steal it.""Rubbish," said Hagrid again. "Snape's a Hogwarts teacher, he'd donothin' of the sort.""So why did he just try and kill Harry?" cried Hermione.The afternoon's events certainly seemed to have changed her mind aboutSnape.I know a jinx when I see one, Hagrid, I've read all about them!You've got to keep eye contact, and Snape wasn't blinking at all, I sawhim!""I'm tellin' yeh, yer wrong!" said Hagrid hotly. "I don' know whyHarry's broom acted like that, but Snape wouldn' try an' kill a student!Now, listen to me, all three of yeh -- yer meddlin' in things that don'concern yeh. It's dangerous. You forget that dog, an' you forget whatit's guardin', that's between Professor Dumbledore an' Nicolas Flamel--""Aha!" said Harry, "so there's someone called Nicolas Flamel involved,is there?"Hagrid looked furious with himself.CHAPTER TWELVETHE MIRROR OF ERISEDChristmas was coming. One morning in mid-December, Hogwarts woke to find




155itself covered in several feet of snow. The lake froze solid and theWeasley twins were punished for bewitching several snowballs so thatthey followed Quirrell around, bouncing off the back of his turban. Thefew owls that managed to battle their way through the stormy sky todeliver mail had to be nursed back to health by Hagrid before they couldfly off again.No one could wait for the holidays to start. While the Gryffindor commonroom and the Great Hall had roaring fires, the drafty corridors hadbecome icy and a bitter wind rattled the windows in the classrooms.Worst of all were Professor Snape's classes down in the dungeons, wheretheir breath rose in a mist before them and they kept as close aspossible to their hot cauldrons."I do feel so sorry," said Draco Malfoy, one Potions class, "for allthose people who have to stay at Hogwarts for Christmas because they'renot wanted at home."He was looking over at Harry as he spoke. Crabbe and Goyle chuckled.Harry, who was measuring out powdered spine of lionfish, ignored them.Malfoy had been even more unpleasant than usual since the Quidditchmatch. Disgusted that the Slytherins had lost, he had tried to geteveryone laughing at how a wide-mouthed tree frog would be replacingHarry as Seeker next. Then he'd realized that nobody found this funny,because they were all so impressed at the way Harry had managed to stayon his bucking broomstick. So Malfoy, jealous and angry, had gone backto taunting Harry about having no proper family.It was true that Harry wasn't going back to Privet Drive for Christmas.Professor McGonagall had come around the week before, making a list ofstudents who would be staying for the holidays, and Harry had signed upat once. He didn't feel sorry for himself at all; this would probably bethe best Christmas he'd ever had. Ron and his brothers were staying,too, because Mr. and Mrs. Weasley were going to Romania to visitCharlie.When they left the dungeons at the end of Potions, they found a largefir tree blocking the corridor ahead. Two enormous feet sticking out atthe bottom and a loud puffing sound told them that Hagrid was behind it."Hi, Hagrid, want any help?" Ron asked, sticking his head through thebranches.




156"Nah, I'm all right, thanks, Ron.""Would you mind moving out of the way?" came Malfoys cold drawl frombehind them. "Are you trying to earn some extra money, Weasley? Hopingto be gamekeeper yourself when you leave Hogwarts, I suppose -- that hutof Hagrid's must seem like a palace compared to what your family's usedto."Ron dived at Malfoy just as Snape came up the stairs."WEASLEY!"Ron let go of the front of Malfoy's robes."He was provoked, Professor Snape," said Hagrid, sticking his huge hairyface out from behind the tree. "Malfoy was insultin' his family.""Be that as it may, fighting is against Hogwarts rules, Hagrid," saidSnape silkily. "Five points from Gryffindor, Weasley, and be grateful itisn't more. Move along, all of you."Malfoy, Crabbe, and Goyle pushed roughly past the tree, scatteringneedles everywhere and smirking."I'll get him," said Ron, grinding his teeth at Malfoy's back, "one ofthese days, I'll get him --""I hate them both," said Harry, "Malfoy and Snape.""Come on, cheer up, it's nearly Christmas," said Hagrid. "Tell yeh what,come with me an' see the Great Hall, looks a treat."So the three of them followed Hagrid and his tree off to -the GreatHall, where Professor McGonagall and Professor Flitwick were busy withthe Christmas decorations."Ah, Hagrid, the last tree -- put it in the far corner, would you?"The hall looked spectacular. Festoons of holly and mistletoe hung allaround the walls, and no less than twelve towering Christmas trees stoodaround the room, some sparkling with tiny icicles, some glittering withhundreds of candles.




157"How many days you got left until yer holidays?" Hagrid asked."Just one," said Hermione. "And that reminds me -Harry, Ron, we've gothalf an hour before lunch, we should be in the library.""Oh yeah, you're right," said Ron, tearing his eyes away from ProfessorFlitwick, who had golden bubbles blossoming out of his wand and wastrailing them over the branches of the new tree."The library?" said Hagrid, following them out of the hall. "Just beforethe holidays? Bit keen, aren't yeh?""Oh, we're not working," Harry told him brightly. "Ever since youmentioned Nicolas Flamel we've been trying to find out who he is.""You what?" Hagrid looked shocked. "Listen here -- I've told yeh -- dropit. It's nothin' to you what that dog's guardin'.""We just want to know who Nicolas Flamel is, that's all," said Hermione."Unless you'd like to tell us and save us the trouble?" Harry added. "Wemust've been through hundreds of books already and we can't find himanywhere -- just give us a hint -- I know I've read his name somewhere.""I'm sayin' nothin, said Hagrid flatly."Just have to find out for ourselves, then," said Ron, and they leftHagrid looking disgruntled and hurried off to the library.They had indeed been searching books for Flamel's name ever since Hagridhad let it slip, because how else were they going to find out what Snapewas trying to steal? The trouble was, it was very hard to know where tobegin, not knowing what Flamel might have done to get himself into abook. He wasn't in Great Wizards of the Twentieth Century, or NotableMagical Names of Our Time; he was missing, too, from Important ModernMagical Discoveries, and A Study of Recent Developments in Wizardry. Andthen, of course, there was the sheer size of the library; tens ofthousands of books; thousands of shelves; hundreds of narrow rows.Hermione took out a list of subjects and titles she had decided tosearch while Ron strode off down a row of books and started pulling themoff the shelves at random. Harry wandered over to the RestrictedSection. He had been wondering for a while if Flamel wasn't somewhere in




158there. Unfortunately, you needed a specially signed note from one of theteachers to look in any of the restricted books, and he knew he'd neverget one. These were the books containing powerful Dark Magic nevertaught at Hogwarts, and only read by older students studying advancedDefense Against the Dark Arts."What are you looking for, boy?""Nothing," said Harry.Madam Pince the librarian brandished a feather duster at him."You'd better get out, then. Go on -- out!"Wishing he'd been a bit quicker at thinking up some story, Harry leftthe library. He, Ron, and Hermione had already agreed they'd better notask Madam Pince where they could find Flamel. They were sure she'd beable to tell them, but they couldn't risk Snape hearing what they wereup to.Harry waited outside in the corridor to see if the other two had foundanything, but he wasn't very hopeful. They had been looking for twoweeks, after A, but as they only had odd moments between lessons itwasn't surprising they'd found nothing. What they really needed was anice long search without Madam Pince breathing down their necks.Five minutes later, Ron and Hermione joined him, shaking their heads.They went off to lunch."You will keep looking while I'm away, won't you?" said Hermione. "Andsend me an owl if you find anything.""And you could ask your parents if they know who Flamel is," said Ron."It'd be safe to ask them.""Very safe, as they're both dentists," said Hermione.Once the holidays had started, Ron and Harry were having too good a timeto think much about Flamel. They had the dormitory to themselves and thecommon room was far emptier than usual, so they were able to get thegood armchairs by the fire. They sat by the hour eating anything theycould spear on a toasting fork -- bread, English muffins, marshmallows-- and plotting ways of getting Malfoy expelled, which were fun to talk




159about even if they wouldn't work.Ron also started teaching Harry wizard chess. This was exactly likeMuggle chess except that the figures were alive, which made it a lotlike directing troops in battle. Ron's set was very old and battered.Like everything else he owned, it had once belonged to someone else inhis family -- in this case, his grandfather. However, old chessmenweren't a drawback at all. Ron knew them so well he never had troublegetting them to do what he wanted.Harry played with chessmen Seamus Finnigan had lent him, and they didn'ttrust him at all. He wasn't a very good player yet and they keptshouting different bits of advice at him, which was confusing. "Don'tsend me there, can't you see his knight? Send him, we can afford to losehim." On Christmas Eve, Harry went to bed looking forward to the nextday for the food and the fun, but not expecting any presents at all.When he woke early in the morning, however, the first thing he saw was asmall pile of packages at the foot of his bed."Merry Christmas," said Ron sleepily as Harry scrambled out of bed andpulled on his bathrobe."You, too," said Harry. "Will you look at this? I've got some presents!""What did you expect, turnips?" said Ron, turning to his own pile, whichwas a lot bigger than Harry's.Harry picked up the top parcel. It was wrapped in thick brown paper andscrawled across it was To Harry, from Hagrid. Inside was a roughly cutwooden flute. Hagrid had obviously whittled it himself. Harry blew it --it sounded a bit like an owl.A second, very small parcel contained a note.We received your message and enclose your Christmas present. From UncleVernon and Aunt Petunia. Taped to the note was a fifty-pence piece."That's friendly," said Harry.Ron was fascinated by the fifty pence."Weird!" he said, 'NMat a shape! This is money?"




160"You can keep it," said Harry, laughing at how pleased Ron was. "Hagridand my aunt and uncle -- so who sent these?""I think I know who that one's from," said Ron, turning a bit pink andpointing to a very lumpy parcel. "My mom. I told her you didn't expectany presents and -- oh, no," he groaned, "she's made you a Weasleysweater."Harry had torn open the parcel to find a thick, hand-knitted sweater inemerald green and a large box of homemade fudge."Every year she makes us a sweater," said Ron, unwrapping his own, "andmine's always maroon.""That's really nice of her," said Harry, trying the fudge, which wasvery tasty.His next present also contained candy -- a large box of Chocolate Frogsfrom Hermione.This only left one parcel. Harry picked it up and felt it. It was verylight. He unwrapped it.Something fluid and silvery gray went slithering to the floor where itlay in gleaming folds. Ron gasped."I've heard of those," he said in a hushed voice, dropping the box ofEvery Flavor Beans he'd gotten from Hermione. "If that's what I think itis -- they're really rare, and really valuable.""What is it?"Harry picked the shining, silvery cloth off the floor. It was strange tothe touch, like water woven into material."It's an invisibility cloak," said Ron, a look of awe on his face. "I'msure it is -- try it on."Harry threw the cloak around his shoulders and Ron gave a yell."It is! Look down!"Harry looked down at his feet, but they were gone. He dashed to the




161mirror. Sure enough, his reflection looked back at him, just his headsuspended in midair, his body completely invisible. He pulled the cloakover his head and his reflection vanished completely."There's a note!" said Ron suddenly. "A note fell out of it!"Harry pulled off the cloak and seized the letter. Written in narrow,loopy writing he had never seen before were the following words: Yourfather left this in my possession before he died. It is time it wasreturned to you. Use it well.A Very Merry Christmas to you.There was no signature. Harry stared at the note. Ron was admiring thecloak."I'd give anything for one of these," he said. "Anything. What's thematter?""Nothing," said Harry. He felt very strange. Who had sent the cloak? Hadit really once belonged to his father?Before he could say or think anything else, the dormitory door was flungopen and Fred and George Weasley bounded in. Harry stuffed the cloakquickly out of sight. He didn't feel like sharing it with anyone elseyet."Merry Christmas!""Hey, look -- Harry's got a Weasley sweater, too!"Fred and George were wearing blue sweaters, one with a large yellow F onit, the other a G."Harry's is better than ours, though," said Fred, holding up Harry'ssweater. "She obviously makes more of an effort if you're not family.""Why aren't you wearing yours, Ron?" George demanded. "Come on, get iton, they're lovely and warm.""I hate maroon," Ron moaned halfheartedly as he pulled it over his head.




162"You haven't got a letter on yours," George observed. "I suppose shethinks you don't forget your name. But we're not stupid -- we know we'recalled Gred and Forge.""What's all th is noise.Percy Weasley stuck his head through the door, looking disapproving. Hehad clearly gotten halfway through unwrapping his presents as he, too,carried a lumpy sweater over his arm, whichFred seized."P for prefect! Get it on, Percy, come on, we're all wearing ours, evenHarry got one.""I -- don't -- want said Percy thickly, as the twins forced the sweaterover his head, knocking his glasses askew."And you're not sitting with the prefects today, either," saidGeorge. "Christmas is a time for family."They frog-marched Percy from the room, his arms pinned to his side byhis sweater.Harry had never in all his life had such a Christmas dinner. A hundredfat, roast turkeys; mountains of roast and boiled potatoes; platters ofchipolatas; tureens of buttered peas, silver boats of thick, rich gravyand cranberry sauce -- and stacks of wizard crackers every few feetalong the table. These fantastic party favors were nothing like thefeeble Muggle ones the Dursleys usually bought, with their littleplastic toys and their flimsy paper hats inside. Harry pulled a wizardcracker with Fred and it didn't just bang, it went off with a blast likea cannon and engulfed them all in a cloud of blue smoke, while from theinside exploded a rear admiral's hat and several live, white mice. Up atthe High Table, Dumbledore had swapped his pointed wizard's hat for aflowered bonnet, and was chuckling merrily at a joke Professor Flitwickhad just read him.Flaming Christmas puddings followed the turkey. Percy nearly broke histeeth on a silver sickle embedded in his slice. Harry watched Hagridgetting redder and redder in the face as he called for more wine,finally kissing Professor McGonagall on the cheek, who, to Harry's




163amazement, giggled and blushed, her top hat lopsided.When Harry finally left the table, he was laden down with a stack ofthings out of the crackers, including a pack of nonexplodable, luminousballoons, a Grow-Your-Own-Warts kit, and his own new wizard chess set.The white mice had disappeared and Harry had a nasty feeling they weregoing to end up as Mrs. Norris's Christmas dinner.Harry and the Weasleys spent a happy afternoon having a furious snowballfight on the grounds. Then, cold, wet, and gasping for breath, theyreturned to the fire in the Gryffindor common room, where Harry broke inhis new chess set by losing spectacularly to Ron. He suspected hewouldn't have lost so badly if Percy hadn't tried to help him so much.After a meal of turkey sandwiches, crumpets, trifle, and Christmas cake,everyone felt too full and sleepy to do much before bed except sit andwatch Percy chase Fred and George all over Gryffindor tower becausethey'd stolen his prefect badge.It had been Harry's best Christmas day ever. Yet something had beennagging at the back of his mind all day. Not until he climbed into bedwas he free to think about it: the invisibility cloak and whoever hadsent it.Ron, full of turkey and cake and with nothing mysterious to bother him,fell asleep almost as soon as he'd drawn the curtains of hisfour-poster. Harry leaned over the side of his own bed and pulled thecloak out from under it.His father's... this had been his father's. He let the material flowover his hands, smoother than silk, light as air. Use it well, the notehad said.He had to try it, now. He slipped out of bed and wrapped the cloakaround himself. Looking down at his legs, he saw only moonlight andshadows. It was a very funny feeling.Use it well.Suddenly, Harry felt wide-awake. The whole of Hogwarts was open to himin this cloak. Excitement flooded through him as he stood there in thedark and silence. He could go anywhere in this, anywhere, and Filchwould never know.




164Ron grunted in his sleep. Should Harry wake him? Something held him back-- his father's cloak -- he felt that this time -- the first time -- hewanted to use it alone.He crept out of the dormitory, down the stairs, across the common room,and climbed through the portrait hole."Who's there?" squawked the Fat Lady. Harry said nothing. He walkedquickly down the corridor.Where should he go? He stopped, his heart racing, and thought. And thenit came to him. The Restricted Section in the library. He'd be able toread as long as he liked, as long as it took to find out who Flamel was.He set off, drawing the invisibility cloak tight around him as hewalked.The library was pitch-black and very eerie. Harry lit a lamp to see hisway along the rows of books. The lamp looked as if it was floating alongin midair, and even though Harry could feel his arm supporting it, thesight gave him the creeps.The Restricted Section was right at the back of the library. Step pingcarefully over the rope that separated these books from the rest of thelibrary, he held up his lamp to read the titles.They didn't tell him much. Their peeling, faded gold letters spelledwords in languages Harry couldn't understand. Some had no title at all.One book had a dark stain on it that looked horribly like blood. Thehairs on the back of Harry's neck prickled. Maybe he was imagining it,maybe not, but he thought a faint whispering was coming from the books,as though they knew someone was there who shouldn't be.He had to start somewhere. Setting the lamp down carefully on the floor,he looked along the bottom shelf for an interestinglooking book. A largeblack and silver volume caught his eye. He pulled it out withdifficulty, because it was very heavy, and, balancing it on his knee,let it fall open.A piercing, bloodcurdling shriek split the silence -- the book wasscreaming! Harry snapped it shut, but the shriek went on and on, onehigh, unbroken, earsplitting note. He stumbled backward and knocked overhis lamp, which went out at once. Panicking, he heard footsteps coming




165down the corridor outside -- stuffing the shrieking book back on theshelf, he ran for it. He passed Filch in the doorway; Filch's pale, wildeyes looked straight through him, and Harry slipped under Filch'soutstretched arm and streaked off up the corridor, the book's shrieksstill ringing in his ears.He came to a sudden halt in front of a tall suit of armor. He had beenso busy getting away from the library, he hadn't paid attention to wherehe was going. Perhaps because it was dark, he didn't recognize where hewas at all. There was a suit of armor near the kitchens, he knew, but hemust be five floors above there."You asked me to come directly to you, Professor, if anyone waswandering around at night, and somebody's been in the library RestrictedSection."Harry felt the blood drain out of his face. Wherever he was, Filch mustknow a shortcut, because his soft, greasy voice was getting nearer, andto his horror, it was Snape who replied, "The Restricted Section? Well,they can't be far, we'll catch them."Harry stood rooted to the spot as Filch and Snape came around the cornerahead. They couldn't see him, of course, but it was a narrow corridorand if they came much nearer they'd knock right into him -- the cloakdidn't stop him from being solid.He backed away as quietly as he could. A door stood ajar to his left. Itwas his only hope. He squeezed through it, holding his breath, tryingnot to move it, and to his relief he managed to get inside the roomwithout their noticing anything. They walked straight past, and Harryleaned against the wall, breathing deeply, listening to their footstepsdying away. That had been close, very close. It was a few seconds beforehe noticed anything about the room he had hidden in.It looked like an unused classroom. The dark shapes of desks and chairswere piled against the walls, and there was an upturned wastepaperbasket -- but propped against the wall facing him was something thatdidn't look as if it belonged there, something that looked as if someonehad just put it there to keep it out of the way.It was a magnificent mirror, as high as the ceiling, with an ornate goldframe, standing on two clawed feet. There was an inscription carvedaround the top: Erised stra ehru oyt ube cafru oyt on wohsi. His panic




166fading now that there was no sound of Filch and Snape, Harry movednearer to the mirror, wanting to look at himself but see no reflectionagain. He stepped in front of it.He had to clap his hands to his mouth to stop himself from screaming. Hewhirled around. His heart was pounding far more furiously than when thebook had screamed -- for he had seen not only himself in the mirror, buta whole crowd of people standing right behind him.But the room was empty. Breathing very fast, he turned slowly back tothe mirror.There he was, reflected in it, white and scared-looking, and there,reflected behind him, were at least ten others. Harry looked over hisshoulder -- but still, no one was there. Or were they all invisible,too? Was he in fact in a room full of invisible people and this mirror'strick was that it reflected them, invisible or not?He looked in the mirror again. A woman standing right behind hisreflection was smiling at him and waving. He reached out a hand and feltthe air behind him. If she was really there, he'd touch her, theirreflections were so close together, but he felt only air -- she and theothers existed only in the mirror.She was a very pretty woman. She had dark red hair and her eyes -- hereyes are just like mine, Harry thought, edging a little closer to theglass. Bright green -- exactly the same shape, but then he noticed thatshe was crying; smiling, but crying at the same time. The tall, thin,black-haired man standing next to her put his arm around her. He woreglasses, and his hair was very untidy. It stuck up at the back, just asHarry's did.Harry was so close to the mirror now that his nose was nearly touchingthat of his reflection."Mom?" he whispered. "Dad?"They just looked at him, smiling. And slowly, Harry looked into thefaces of the other people in the mirror, and saw other pairs of greeneyes like his, other noses like his, even a little old man who looked asthough he had Harry's knobbly knees -- Harry was looking at his family,for the first time in his life.




167The Potters smiled and waved at Harry and he stared hungrily back atthem, his hands pressed flat against the glass as though he was hopingto fall right through it and reach them. He had a powerful kind of acheinside him, half joy, half terrible sadness.How long he stood there, he didn't know. The reflections did not fadeand he looked and looked until a distant noise brought him back to hissenses. He couldn't stay here, he had to find his way back to bed. Hetore his eyes away from his mother's face, whispered, "I'll come back,"and hurried from the room."You could have woken me up," said Ron, crossly."You can come tonight, I'm going back, I want to show you the mirror."I'd like to see your mom and dad," Ron said eagerly."And I want to see all your family, all the Weasleys, you'll be able toshow me your other brothers and everyone.""You can see them any old time," said Ron. "Just come round my housethis summer. Anyway, maybe it only shows dead people. Shame about notfinding Flamel, though. Have some bacon or something, why aren't youeating anything?"Harry couldn't eat. He had seen his parents and would be seeing themagain tonight. He had almost forgotten about Flamel. It didn't seem veryimportant anymore. Who cared what the three headed dog was guarding?What did it matter if Snape stole it, really?"Are you all right?" said Ron. "You look odd."What Harry feared most was that he might not be able to find the mirrorroom again. With Ron covered in the cloak, too, they had to walk muchmore slowly the next night. They tried retracing Harry's route from thelibrary, wandering around the dark passageways for nearly an hour."I'm freezing," said Ron. "Let's forget it and go back.""No!" Harry hissed. I know it's here somewhere."They passed the ghost of a tall witch gliding in the opposite direction,but saw no one else. just as Ron started moaning that his feet were dead




168with cold, Harry spotted the suit of armor."It's here -- just here -- yes!"They pushed the door open. Harry dropped the cloak from around hisshoulders and ran to the mirror.There they were. His mother and father beamed at the sight of him."See?" Harry whispered."I can't see anything.""Look! Look at them all... there are loads of them....""I can only see you.""Look in it properly, go on, stand where I am."Harry stepped aside, but with Ron in front of the mirror, he couldn'tsee his family anymore, just Ron in his paisley pajamas.Ron, though, was staring transfixed at his image."Look at me!" he said."Can you see all your family standing around you?""No -- I'm alone -- but I'm different -- I look older -- and I'm headboy!""What?""I am -- I'm wearing the badge like Bill used to -- and I'm holding thehouse cup and the Quidditch cup -- I'm Quidditch captain, too.Ron tore his eyes away from this splendid sight to look excitedly atHarry."Do you think this mirror shows the future?""How can it? All my family are dead -- let me have another look --"




169"You had it to yourself all last night, give me a bit more time.""You're only holding the Quidditch cup, what's interesting about that? Iwant to see my parents.""Don't push me --"A sudden noise outside in the corridor put an end to their discussion.They hadn't realized how loudly they had been talking."Quick!"Ron threw the cloak back over them as the luminous eyes of Mrs. Norriscame round the door. Ron and Harry stood quite still, both thinking thesame thing -- did the cloak work on cats? After what seemed an age, sheturned and left."This isn't safe -- she might have gone for Filch, I bet she heard us.Come on."And Ron pulled Harry out of the room.The snow still hadn't melted the next morning."Want to play chess, Harry?" said Ron."No.""Why don't we go down and visit Hagrid?""No... you go...""I know what you're thinking about, Harry, that mirror. Don't go backtonight.""Why not?""I dunno, I've just got a bad feeling about it -- and anyway, you've hadtoo many close shaves already. Filch, Snape, and Mrs. Norris arewandering around. So what if they can't see you? What if they walk intoyou? What if you knock something over?""You sound like Hermione."




170"I'm serious, Harry, don't go."But Harry only had one thought in his head, which was to get back infront of the mirror, and Ron wasn't going to stop him.That third night he found his way more quickly than before. He waswalking so fast he knew he was making more noise than was wise, but hedidn't meet anyone.And there were his mother and father smiling at him again, and one ofhis grandfathers nodding happily. Harry sank down to sit on the floor infront of the mirror. There was nothing to stop him from staying here allnight with his family. Nothing at all.Except --"So -- back again, Harry?"Harry felt as though his insides had turned to ice. He looked behindhim. Sitting on one of the desks by the wall was none other than AlbusDumbledore. Harry must have walked straight past him, so desperate toget to the mirror he hadn't noticed him." -- I didn't see you, sir.""Strange how nearsighted being invisible can make you," said Dumbledore,and Harry was relieved to see that he was smiling."So," said Dumbledore, slipping off the desk to sit on the floor withHarry, "you, like hundreds before you, have discovered the delights ofthe Mirror of Erised.""I didn't know it was called that, Sir.""But I expect you've realized by now what it does?""It -- well -- it shows me my family --""And it showed your friend Ron himself as head boy.""How did you know --?"




171"I don't need a cloak to become invisible," said Dumbledore gently."Now, can you think what the Mirror of Erised shows us all?"Harry shook his head."Let me explain. The happiest man on earth would be able to use theMirror of Erised like a normal mirror, that is, he would look into itand see himself exactly as he is. Does that help?"Harry thought. Then he said slowly, "It shows us what we want...whatever we want...""Yes and no," said Dumbledore quietly. "It shows us nothing more or lessthan the deepest, most desperate desire of our hearts. You, who havenever known your family, see them standing around you. Ronald Weasley,who has always been overshadowed by his brothers, sees himself standingalone, the best of all of them. However, this mirror will give usneither knowledge or truth. Men have wasted away before it, entranced bywhat they have seen, or been driven mad, not knowing if what it shows isreal or even possible."The Mirror will be moved to a new home tomorrow, Harry, and I ask younot to go looking for it again. If you ever do run across it, you willnow be prepared. It does not do to dwell on dreams and forget to live,remember that. Now, why don't you put that admirable cloak back on andget off to bed?"Harry stood up."Sir -- Professor Dumbledore? Can I ask you something?""Obviously, you've just done so," Dumbledore smiled. "You may ask me onemore thing, however.""What do you see when you look in the mirror?""I? I see myself holding a pair of thick, woolen socks."Harry stared."One can never have enough socks," said Dumbledore. "Another Christmashas come and gone and I didn't get a single pair. People will insist ongiving me books."




172It was only when he was back in bed that it struck Harry that Dumbledoremight not have been quite truthful. But then, he thought, as he shovedScabbers off his pillow, it had been quite a personal question.CHAPTER THIRTEENNICOLAS FLAMELDumbledore had convinced Harry not to go looking for the Mirror ofErised again, and for the rest of the Christmas holidays theinvisibility cloak stayed folded at the bottom of his trunk. Harrywished he could forget what he'd seen in the mirror as easily, but hecouldn't. He started having nightmares. Over and over again he dreamedabout his parents disappearing in a flash of green light, while a highvoice cackled with laughter."You see, Dumbledore was right, that mirror could drive you mad," saidRon, when Harry told him about these drearns.Hermione, who came back the day before term started, took a differentview of things. She was torn between horror at the idea of Harry beingout of bed, roaming the school three nights in a row ("If Filch hadcaught you!"), and disappointment that he hadn't at least found out whoNicolas Flamel was.They had almost given up hope of ever finding Flamel in a li- brarybook, even though Harry was still sure he'd read the name somewhere.Once term had started, they were back to skimming through books for tenminutes during their breaks. Harry had even less time than the othertwo, because Quidditch practice had started again.Wood was working the team harder than ever. Even the endless rain thathad replaced the snow couldn't dampen his spirits. The Weasleyscomplained that Wood was becoming a fanatic, but Harry was on Wood'sside. If they won their next match, against Hufflepuff, they wouldovertake Slytherin in the house championship for the first time in sevenyears. Quite apart from wanting to win, Harry found that he had fewernightmares when he was tired out after training.Then, during one particularly wet and muddy practice session, Wood gavethe team a bit of bad news. He'd just gotten very angry with the




173Weasleys, who kept dive-bombing each other and pretending to fall offtheir brooms."Will you stop messing around!" he yelled. "That's exactly the sort ofthing that'll lose us the match! Snape's refereeing this time, and he'llbe looking for any excuse to knock points off Gryffindor!"George Weasley really did fall off his broom at these words."Snape's refereeing?" he spluttered through a mouthful of mud. "When'she ever refereed a Quidditch match? He's not going to be fair if wemight overtake Slytherin."The rest of the team landed next to George to complain, too."It's not my fault," said Wood. "We've just got to make sure we play aclean game, so Snape hasn't got an excuse to pick on us."Which was all very well, thought Harry, but he had another reason fornot wanting Snape near him while he was playing Quidditch....The rest of the team hung back to talk to one another as usual at theend of practice, but Harry headed straight back to the Gryffindor commonroom, where he found Ron and Hermione playing chess. Chess was the onlything Hermione ever lost at, something Harry and Ron thought was verygood for her."Don't talk to me for a moment," said Ron when Harry sat down next tohim, "I need to concen --" He caught sight of Harry's face. "What's thematter with you? You look terrible."Speaking quietly so that no one else would hear, Harry told the othertwo about Snape's sudden, sinister desire to be a Quidditch referee."Don't play," said Hermione at once."Say you're ill," said Ron."Pretend to break your leg," Hermione suggested."Really break your leg," said Ron."I can't," said Harry. "There isn't a reserve Seeker. If I back out,




174Gryffindor can't play at all."At that moment Neville toppled into the common room. How he had managedto climb through the portrait hole was anyone's guess, because his legshad been stuck together with what they recognized at once as theLeg-Locker Curse. He must have had to bunny hop all the way up toGryffindor tower.Everyone fell over laughing except Hermione, who leapt up and performedthe countercurse. Neville's legs sprang apart and he got to his feet,trembling. "What happened?" Hermione asked him, leading him over to sitwith Harry and Ron."Malfoy," said Neville shakily. "I met him outside the library. He saidhe'd been looking for someone to practice that on.""Go to Professor McGonagall!" Hermione urged Neville. "Report him!"Neville shook his head."I don't want more trouble," he mumbled."You've got to stand up to him, Neville!" said Ron. "He's used towalking all over people, but that's no reason to lie down in front ofhim and make it easier.""There's no need to tell me I'm not brave enough to be in Gryffindor,Malfoy's already done that," Neville choked out.Harry felt in the pocket of his robes and pulled out a Chocolate Frog,the very last one from the box Hermione had given him for Christmas. Hegave it to Neville, who looked as though he might cry."You're worth twelve of Malfoy," Harry said. "The Sorting Hat chose youfor Gryffindor, didn't it? And where's Malfoy? In stinking Slytherin."Neville's lips twitched in a weak smile as he unwrapped the frog."Thanks, Harry... I think I'll go to bed.... D'you want the card, youcollect them, don't you?"As Neville walked away, Harry looked at the Famous Wizard card.




175"Dumbledore again," he said, "He was the first one I ever-"He gasped. He stared at the back of the card. Then he looked up at Ronand Hermione."I've found him!" he whispered. "I've found Flamel! I told you I'd readthe name somewhere before, I read it on the train coming here -- listento this: 'Dumbledore is particularly famous for his defeat of the darkwizard Grindelwald in 1945, for the discovery of the twelve uses ofdragon's blood, and his work on alchemy with his partner, NicolasFlamel'!"Hermione jumped to her feet. She hadn't looked so excited since they'dgotten back the marks for their very first piece of homework."Stay there!" she said, and she sprinted up the stairs to the girls'dormitories. Harry and Ron barely had time to exchange mystified looksbefore she was dashing back, an enormous old book in her arms."I never thought to look in here!" she whispered excitedly. "I got thisout of the library weeks ago for a bit of light reading.""Light?" said Ron, but Hermione told him to be quiet until she'd lookedsomething up, and started flicking frantically through the pages,muttering to herself.At last she found what she was looking for."I knew it! I knew it!""Are we allowed to speak yet?" said Ron grumpily. Hermione ignored him."Nicolas Flamel," she whispered dramatically, "is the only known makerof the Sorcerer's Stone!"This didn't have quite the effect she'd expected."The what?" said Harry and Ron."Oh, honestly, don't you two read? Look -- read that, there."She pushed the book toward them, and Harry and Ron read: The ancientstudy of alchemy is concerned with making the Sorcerer's Stone, a




176legendary substance with astonishing powers. The stone will transformany metal into pure gold. It also produces the Elixir of Life, whichwill make the drinker immortal.There have been many reports of the Sorcerer's Stone over the centuries,but the only Stone currently in existence belongs to Mr. Nicolas Flamel,the noted alchemist and opera lover. Mr. Flamel, who celebrated his sixhundred and sixty-fifth birthday last year, enjoys a quiet life in Devonwith his wife, Perenelle (six hundred and fifty-eight)."See?" said Hermione, when Harry and Ron had finished. "The dog must beguarding Flamel's Sorcerer's Stone! I bet he asked Dumbledore to keep itsafe for him, because they're friends and he knew someone was after it,that's why he wanted the Stone moved out of Gringotts!""A stone that makes gold and stops you from ever dying!" said Harry. "Nowonder Snape's after it! Anyone would want it.""And no wonder we couldn't find Flamel in that Study of RecentDevelopments in Wizardry," said Ron. "He's not exactly recent if he'ssix hundred and sixty-five, is he?"The next morning in Defense Against the Dark Arts, while copying downdifferent ways of treating werewolf bites, Harry and Ron were stilldiscussing what they'd do with a Sorcerer's Stone if they had one. Itwasn't until Ron said he'd buy his own Quidditch team that Harryremembered about Snape and the coming match."I'm going to play," he told Ron and Hermione. "If I don't, all theSlytherins will think I'm just too scared to face Snape. I'll showthem... it'll really wipe the smiles off their faces if we win.""Just as long as we're not wiping you off the field," said Hermione.As the match drew nearer, however, Harry became more and more nervous,whatever he told Ron and Hermione. The rest of the team wasn't too calm,either. The idea of overtaking Slytherin in the house championship waswonderful, no one had done it for seven years, but would they be allowedto, with such a biased referee?Harry didn't know whether he was imagining it or not, but he seemed tokeep running into Snape wherever he went. At times, he even wonderedwhether Snape was following him, trying to catch him on his own. Potions




177lessons were turning into a sort of weekly torture, Snape was sohorrible to Harry. Could Snape possibly know they'd found out about theSorcerer's Stone? Harry didn't see how he could -- yet he sometimes hadthe horrible feeling that Snape could read minds.Harry knew, when they wished him good luck outside the locker rooms thenext afternoon, that Ron and Hermione were wondering whether they'd eversee him alive again. This wasn't what you'd call comforting. Harryhardly heard a word of Wood's pep talk as he pulled on his Quidditchrobes and picked up his Nimbus Two Thousand.Ron and Hermione, meanwhile, had found a place in the stands next toNeville, who couldn't understand why they looked so grim and worried, orwhy they had both brought their wands to the match. Little did Harryknow that Ron and Hermione had been secretly practicing the Leg-LockerCurse. They'd gotten the idea from Malfoy using it on Neville, and wereready to use it on Snape if he showed any sign of wanting to hurt Harry."Now, don't forget, it's Locomotor Mortis," Hermione muttered as Ronslipped his wand up his sleeve."I know," Ron snapped. "Don't nag."Back in the locker room, Wood had taken Harry aside."Don't want to pressure you, Potter, but if we ever need an earlycapture of the Snitch it's now. Finish the game before Snape can favorHufflepuff too much.""The whole school's out there!" said Fred Weasley, peering out of thedoor. "Even -- blimey -- Dumbledore's come to watch!"Harry's heart did a somersault."Dumbledore?" he said, dashing to the door to make sure. Fred was right.There was no mistaking that silver beard.Harry could have laughed out loud with relief He was safe. There wassimply no way that Snape would dare to try to hurt him if Dumbledore waswatching.Perhaps that was why Snape was looking so angry as the teams marchedonto the field, something that Ron noticed, too.




178"I've never seen Snape look so mean," he told Hermione. "Look -they'reoff Ouch!"Someone had poked Ron in the back of the head. It was Malfoy."Oh, sorry, Weasley, didn't see you there."Malfoy grinned broadly at Crabbe and Goyle."Wonder how long Potter's going to stay on his broom this time? Anyonewant a bet? What about you, Weasley?"Ron didn't answer; Snape had just awarded Hufflepuff a penalty becauseGeorge Weasley had hit a Bludger at him. Hermione, who had all herfingers crossed in her lap, was squinting fixedly at Harry, who wascircling the game like a hawk, looking for the Snitch."You know how I think they choose people for the Gryffindor team?" saidMalfoy loudly a few minutes later, as Snape awarded Hufflepuff anotherpenalty for no reason at all. "It's people they feel sorry for. See,there's Potter, who's got no parents, then there's the Weasleys, who'vegot no money -- you should be on the team, Longbottom, you've got nobrains."Neville went bright red but turned in his seat to face Malfoy."I'm worth twelve of you, Malfoy," he stammered.Malfoy, Crabbe, and Goyle howled with laughter, but Ron, still notdaring to take his eyes from the game, said, "You tell him, Neville.""Longbottom, if brains were gold you'd be poorer than Weasley, andthat's saying something."Ron's nerves were already stretched to the breaking point with anxietyabout Harry."I'm warning you, Malfoy -- one more word"Ron!" said Hermione suddenly, "Harry --""What? Where?"




179Harry had suddenly gone into a spectacular dive, which drew gasps andcheers from the crowd. Hermione stood up, her crossed fingers in hermouth, as Harry streaked toward the ground like a bullet."You're in luck, Weasley, Potter's obviously spotted some money on theground!" said Malfoy.Ron snapped. Before Malfoy knew what was happening, Ron was on top ofhim, wrestling him to the ground. Neville hesitated, then clambered overthe back of his seat to help."Come on, Harry!" Hermione screamed, leaping onto her seat to watch asHarry sped straight at Snape -- she didn't even notice Malfoy and Ronrolling around under her seat, or the scuffles and yelps coming from thewhirl of fists that was Neville, Crabbe, and Goyle.Up in the air, Snape turned on his broomstick just in time to seesomething scarlet shoot past him, missing him by inches -- the nextsecond, Harry had pulled out of the dive, his arm raised in triumph, theSnitch clasped in his hand.The stands erupted; it had to be a record, no one could ever rememberthe Snitch being caught so quickly."Ron! Ron! Where are you? The game's over! Harry's won! We've won!Gryffindor is in the lead!" shrieked Hermione, dancing up and down onher seat and hugging Parvati Patil in the row in front.Harry jumped off his broom, a foot from the ground. He couldn't believeit. He'd done it -- the game was over; it had barely lasted fiveminutes. As Gryffindors came spilling onto the field, he saw Snape landnearby, white-faced and tight-lipped -- then Harry felt a hand on hisshoulder and looked up into Dumbledore's smiling face."Well done," said Dumbledore quietly, so that only Harry could hear."Nice to see you haven't been brooding about that mirror... been keepingbusy... excellent..."Snape spat bitterly on the ground.Harry left the locker room alone some time later, to take his Nimbus TwoThousand back to the broomshed. He couldn't ever remember feeling




180happier. He'd really done something to be proud of now -- no one couldsay he was just a famous name any more. The evening air had neversmelled so sweet. He walked over the damp grass, reliving the last hourin his head, which was a happy blur: Gryffindors running to lift himonto their shoulders; Ron and Hermione in the distance, jumping up anddown, Ron cheering through a heavy nosebleed.Harry had reached the shed. He leaned against the wooden door and lookedup at Hogwarts, with its windows glowing red in the setting sun.Gryffindor in the lead. He'd done it, he'd shown Snape....And speaking of Snape...A hooded figure came swiftly down the front steps of the castle. Clearlynot wanting to be seen, it walked as fast as possible toward theforbidden forest. Harry's victory faded from his mind as he watched. Herecognized the figure's prowling walk. Snape, sneaking into the forestwhile everyone else was at dinner -- what was going on?Harry jumped back on his Nimbus Two Thousand and took off. Glidingsilently over the castle he saw Snape enter the forest at a run. Hefollowed.The trees were so thick he couldn't see where Snape had gone. He flew incircles, lower and lower, brushing the top branches of trees until heheard voices. He glided toward them and landed noiselessly in a toweringbeech tree.He climbed carefully along one of the branches, holding tight to hisbroomstick, trying to see through the leaves. Below, in a shadowyclearing, stood Snape, but he wasn't alone. Quirrell was there, too.Harry couldn't make out the look on his face, but he was stutteringworse than ever. Harry strained to catch what they were saying."... d-don't know why you wanted t-t-to meet here of all p-places,Severus...""Oh, I thought we'd keep this private," said Snape, his voice icy."Students aren't supposed to know about the Sorcerer's Stone, afterall."Harry leaned forward. Quirrell was mumbling something. Snape interruptedhim.




181"Have you found out how to get past that beast of Hagrid's yet?""B-b-but Severus, I --""You don't want me as your enemy, Quirrell," said Snape, taking a steptoward him."I-I don't know what you"You know perfectly well what I mean."An owl hooted loudly, and Harry nearly fell out of the tree. He steadiedhimself in time to hear Snape say, "-- your little bit of hocus-pocus.I'm waiting.""B-but I d-d-don't --""Very well," Snape cut in. "We'll have another little chat soon, whenyou've had time to think things over and decided where your loyaltieslie."He threw his cloak over his head and strode out of the clearing. It wasalmost dark now, but Harry could see Quirrell, standing quite still asthough he was petrified."Harry, where have you been?" Hermione squeaked."We won! You won! We won!" shouted Ron, thumping Harry on the back. "AndI gave Malfoy a black eye, and Neville tried to take on Crabbe and Goylesingle-handed! He's still out cold but Madam Pomftey says he'll be allright - talk about showing Slytherin! Everyone's waiting for you in thecommon room, we're having a party, Fred and George stole some cakes andstuff from the kitchens.""Never mind that now," said Harry breathlessly. "Let's find an emptyroom, you wait 'til you hear this...."He made sure Peeves wasn't inside before shutting the door behind them,then he told them what he'd seen and heard."So we were right, it is the Sorcerer's Stone, and Snape's trying toforce Quirrell to help him get it. He asked if he knew how to get past




182Fluffy - and he said something about Quirrell's 'hocus pocuss-- I reckonthere are other things guarding the stone apart from Fluffy, loads ofenchantments, probably, and Quirrell would have done some anti-Dark Artsspell that Snape needs to break through --""So you mean the Stone's only safe as long as Quirrell stands up toSnape?" said Hermione in alarm."It'll be gone by next Tuesday," said Ron.CHAPTER FOURTEENNORBERT THE NORWEGIAN RIDGEBACKQuirrell, however, must have been braver than they'd thought. In theweeks that followed he did seem to be getting paler and thinner, but itdidn't look as though he'd cracked yet.Every time they passed the third-floor corridor, Harry, Ron, andHermione would press their ears to the door to check that Fluffy wasstill growling inside. Snape was sweeping about in his usual bad temper,which surely meant that the Stone was still safe. Whenever Harry passedQuirrell these days he gave him an encouraging sort of smile, and Ronhad started telling people off for laughing at Quirrell's stutter.Hermione, however, had more on her mind than the Sorcerer's Stone. Shehad started drawing up study schedules and colorcoding all her notes.Harry and Ron wouldn't have minded, but she kept nagging them to do thesame."Hermione, the exams are ages away.""Ten weeks," Hermione snapped. "That's not ages, that's like a second toNicolas Flamel.""But we're not six hundred years old," Ron reminded her. "Anyway, whatare you studying for, you already know it A.""What am I studying for? Are you crazy? You realize we need to passthese exams to get into the second year? They're very important, Ishould have started studying a month ago, I don't know what's gotteninto me...."




183Unfortunately, the teachers seemed to be thinking along the same linesas Hermione. They piled so much homework on them that the Easterholidays weren't nearly as much fun as the Christmas ones. It was hardto relax with Hermione next to you reciting the twelve uses of dragon'sblood or practicing wand movements. Moaning and yawning, Harry and Ronspent most of their free time in the library with her, trying to getthrough all their extra work."I'll never remember this," Ron burst out one afternoon, throwing downhis quill and looking longingly out of the library window. It was thefirst really fine day they'd had in months. The sky was a clear,forget-me-not blue, and there was a feeling in the air of summer coming.Harry, who was looking up "Dittany" in One Thousand Magical Herbs andFungi, didn't look up until he heard Ron say, "Hagrid! What are youdoing in the library?"Hagrid shuffled into view, hiding something behind his back. He lookedvery out of place in his moleskin overcoat."Jus' lookin'," he said, in a shifty voice that got their interest atonce. "An' what're you lot up ter?" He looked suddenly suspicious. "Yernot still lookin' fer Nicolas Flamel, are yeh?" "Oh, we found out who heis ages ago," said Ron impressively. "And we know what that dog'sguarding, it's a Sorcerer's St --""Shhhh!" Hagrid looked around quickly to see if anyone was listening."Don' go shoutin' about it, what's the matter with yeh?""There are a few things we wanted to ask you, as a matter of fact," saidHarry, "about what's guarding the Stone apart from Fluffy --""SHHHH!" said Hagrid again. "Listen - come an' see me later, I'm notpromisin' I'll tell yeh anythin', mind, but don' go rabbitin' about itin here, students aren' s'pposed ter know. They'll think I've told yeh--""See you later, then," said Harry.Hagrid shuffled off."What was he hiding behind his back?" said Hermione thoughtfully.




184"Do you think it had anything to do with the Stone?""I'm going to see what section he was in," said Ron, who'd had enough ofworking. He came back a minute later with a pile of books in his armsand slammed them down on the table."Dragons!" he whispered. "Hagrid was looking up stuff about dragons!Look at these: Dragon Species of Great Britain and Ireland; From Egg toInferno, A Dragon Keeper's Guide.""Hagrid's always wanted a dragon, he told me so the first time I evermet him, " said Harry."But it's against our laws," said Ron. "Dragon breeding was outlawed bythe Warlocks' Convention of 1709, everyone knows that. It's hard to stopMuggles from noticing us if we're keeping dragons in the back garden -anyway, you can't tame dragons, it's dangerous. You should see the burnsCharlie's got off wild ones in Romania.""But there aren't wild dragons in Britain?" said Harry."Of course there are," said Ron. "Common Welsh Green and HebrideanBlacks. The Ministry of Magic has a job hushing them up, I can tell you.Our kind have to keep putting spells on Muggles who've spotted them, tomake them forget.""So what on earths Hagrid up to?" said Hermione.When they knocked on the door of the gamekeeper's hut an hour later,they were surprised to see that all the curtains were closed. Hagridcalled "Who is it?" before he let them in, and then shut the doorquickly behind them.It was stifling hot inside. Even though it was such a warm day, therewas a blazing fire in the grate. Hagrid made them tea and offered themstoat sandwiches, which they refused."So -- yeh wanted to ask me somethin'?""Yes," said Harry. There was no point beating around the bush. "We werewondering if you could tell us what's guarding the Sorcerer's Stoneapart from Fluffy."




185Hagrid frowned at him."0' course I cant, he said. "Number one, I don' know meself. Number two,yeh know too much already, so I wouldn' tell yeh if I could. ThatStone's here fer a good reason. It Was almost stolen outta Gringotts - Is'ppose yeh've worked that out an' all? Beats me how yeh even know abou'Fluffy.""Oh, come on, Hagrid, you might not want to tell us, but you do know,you know everything that goes on round here," said Hermione in a warm,flattering voice. Hagrid's beard twitched and they could tell he wassmiling. "We only wondered who had done the guarding, really." Hermionewent on. "We wondered who Dumbledore had trusted enough to help him,apart from you."Hagrid's chest swelled at these last words. Harry and Ron beamed atHermione."Well, I don' s'pose it could hurt ter tell yeh that... let's see... heborrowed Fluffy from me... then some o' the teachers did enchantments...Professor Sprout -- Professor Flitwick -- Professor McGonagall --" heticked them off on his fingers, "Professor Quirrell -- an' Dumbledorehimself did somethin', o' course. Hang on, I've forgotten someone. Ohyeah, Professor Snape.""Snape?""Yeah -- yer not still on abou' that, are yeh? Look, Snape helpedprotect the Stone, he's not about ter steal it."Harry knew Ron and Hermione were thinking the same as he was. If Snapehad been in on protecting the Stone, it must have been easy to find outhow the other teachers had guarded it. He probably knew everything --except, it seemed, Quirrell's spell and how to get past Fluffy."You're the only one who knows how to get past Fluffy. aren't you,Hagrid?" said Harry anxiously. "And you wouldn't tell anyone, would you?Not even one of the teachers?""Not a soul knows except me an' Dumbledore," said Hagrid proudly."Well, that's something," Harry muttered to the others. "Hagrid, can we




186have a window open? I'm boiling.""Can't, Harry, sorry," said Hagrid. Harry noticed him glance at thefire. Harry looked at it, too."Hagrid -- what's that?"But he already knew what it was. In the very heart of the fire,underneath the kettle, was a huge, black egg."Ah," said Hagrid, fiddling nervously with his beard, "That's er...""Where did you get it, Hagrid?" said Ron, crouching over the fire to geta closer look at the egg. "It must've cost you a fortune.""Won it," said Hagrid. "Las' night. I was down in the village havin' afew drinks an' got into a game o' cards with a stranger. Think he wasquite glad ter get rid of it, ter be honest.""But what are you going to do with it when it's hatched?" said Hermione."Well, I've bin doin' some readin' , said Hagrid, pulling a large bookfrom under his pillow. "Got this outta the library -- Dragon Breedingfor Pleasure and Profit -- it's a bit outta date, o' course, but it'sall in here. Keep the egg in the fire, 'cause their mothers breathe on Iem, see, an' when it hatches, feed it on a bucket o' brandy mixed withchicken blood every half hour. An' see here -- how ter recognizediff'rent eggs -- what I got there's a Norwegian Ridgeback. They'rerare, them."He looked very pleased with himself, but Hermione didn't."Hagrid, you live in a wooden house," she said.But Hagrid wasn't listening. He was humming merrily as he stoked thefire.So now they had something else to worry about: what might happen toHagrid if anyone found out he was hiding an illegal dragon in his hut."Wonder what it's like to have a peaceful life," Ron sighed, as eveningafter evening they struggled through all the extra homework they weregetting. Hermione had now started making study schedules for Harry andRon, too. It was driving them nuts.




187Then, one breakfast time, Hedwig brought Harry another note from Hagrid.He had written only two words: It's hatching.Ron wanted to skip Herbology and go straight down to the hut. Hermionewouldn't hear of it."Hermione, how many times in our lives are we going to see a dragonhatching?""We've got lessons, we'll get into trouble, and that's nothing to whatHagrid's going to be in when someone finds out what he's doing --""Shut up!" Harry whispered.Malfoy was only a few feet away and he had stopped dead to listen. Howmuch had he heard? Harry didn't like the look on Malfoy's face at all.Ron and Hermione argued all the way to Herbology and in the end,Hermione agreed to run down to Hagrid's with the other two duringmorning break. When the bell sounded from the castle at the end of theirlesson, the three of them dropped their trowels at once and hurriedthrough the grounds to the edge of the forest. Hagrid greeted them,looking flushed and excited."It's nearly out." He ushered them inside.The egg was lying on the table. There were deep cracks in it. Somethingwas moving inside; a funny clicking noise was coming from it.They all drew their chairs up to the table and watched with batedbreath.All at once there was a scraping noise and the egg split open. The babydragon flopped onto the table. It wasn't exactly pretty; Harry thoughtit looked like a crumpled, black umbrella. Its spiny wings were hugecompared to its skinny jet body, it had a long snout with wide nostrils,the stubs of horns and bulging, orange eyes.It sneezed. A couple of sparks flew out of its snout."Isn't he beautiful?" Hagrid murmured. He reached out a hand to strokethe dragon's head. It snapped at his fingers, showing pointed fangs.




188"Bless him, look, he knows his mommy!" said Hagrid."Hagrid," said Hermione, "how fast do Norwegian Ridgebacks grow,exactly?"Hagrid was about to answer when the color suddenly drained from his face-- he leapt to his feet and ran to the window."What's the matter?""Someone was lookin' through the gap in the curtains -- it's a kid --he's runnin' back up ter the school."Harry bolted to the door and looked out. Even at a distance there was nomistaking him.Malfoy had seen the dragon.Something about the smile lurking on Malfoy's face during the next weekmade Harry, Ron, and Hermione very nervous. They spent most of theirfree time in Hagrid's darkened hut, trying to reason with him."Just let him go," Harry urged. "Set him free.""I can't," said Hagrid. "He's too little. He'd die."They looked at the dragon. It had grown three times in length in just aweek. Smoke kept furling out of its nostrils. Hagrid hadn't been doinghis gamekeeping duties because the dragon was keeping him so busy. Therewere empty brandy bottles and chicken feathers all over the floor."I've decided to call him Norbert," said Hagrid, looking at the dragonwith misty eyes. "He really knows me now, watch. Norbert! Norbert!Where's Mommy?""He's lost his marbles," Ron muttered in Harry's ear."Hagrid," said Harry loudly, "give it two weeks and Norbert's going tobe as long as your house. Malfoy could go to Dumbledore at any moment."Hagrid bit his lip.




189"I -- I know I can't keep him forever, but I can't jus' dump him, Ican't."Harry suddenly turned to Ron. Charlie, he said."You're losing it, too," said Ron. "I'm Ron, remember?""No -- Charlie -- your brother, Charlie. In Romania. Studying dragons.We could send Norbert to him. Charlie can take care of him and then puthim back in the wild!""Brilliant!" said Ron. "How about it, Hagrid?"And in the end, Hagrid agreed that they could send -an owl to Charlie toask him.The following week dragged by. Wednesday night found Hermione and Harrysitting alone in the common room, long after everyone else had gone tobed. The clock on the wall had justchimed midnight when the portrait hole burst open. Ron appeared out ofnowhere as he pulled off Harry's invisibility cloak. He had been down atHagrid's hut, helping him feed Norbert, who was now eating dead rats bythe crate."It bit me!" he said, showing them his hand, which was wrapped in abloody handkerchief. "I'm not going to be able to hold a quill for aweek. I tell you, that dragon's the most horrible animal I've ever met,but the way Hagrid goes on about it, you'd think it was a fluffy littlebunny rabbit. When it bit me he told me off for frightening it. And whenI left, he was singing it a lullaby."There was a tap on the dark window."It's Hedwig!" said Harry, hurrying to let her in. "She'll haveCharlie's answer!"The three of them put their heads together to read the note.Dear Ron,How are you? Thanks for the letter -- I'd be glad to take the NorwegianRidgeback, but it won't be easy getting him here. I think the best thing




190will be to send him over with some friends of mine who are coming tovisit me next week. Trouble is, they mustn't be seen carrying an illegaldragon.Could you get the Ridgeback up the tallest tower at midnight onSaturday? They can meet you there and take him away while it's stilldark.Send me an answer as soon as possible.Love,CharlieThey looked at one another."We've got the invisibility cloak," said Harry. "It shouldn't be toodifficult -- I think the cloaks big enough to cover two of us andNorbert."It was a mark of how bad the last week had been that the other twoagreed with him. Anything to get rid of Norbert -- and Malfoy.There was a hitch. By the next morning, Ron's bitten hand had swollen totwice its usual size. He didn't know whether it was safe to go to MadamPomfrey -- would she recognize a dragon bite? By the afternoon, though,he had no choice. The cut had turned a nasty shade of green. It lookedas if Norbert's fangs were poisonous.Harry and Hermione rushed up to the hospital wing at the end of the dayto find Ron in a terrible state in bed."It's not just my hand," he whispered, "although that feels like it'sabout to fall off. Malfoy told Madam Pomfrey he wanted to borrow one ofmy books so he could come and have a good laugh at me. He keptthreatening to tell her what really bit me -- I've told her it was adog, but I don't think she believes me -I shouldn't have hit him at theQuidditch match, that's why he's doing this."Harry and Hermione tried to calm Ron down."It'll all be over at midnight on Saturday," said Hermione, but thisdidn't soothe Ron at all. On the contrary, he sat bolt upright and broke




191into a sweat."Midnight on Saturday!" he said in a hoarse voice. "Oh no oh no -- I'vejust remembered -- Charlie's letter was in that book Malfoy took, he'sgoing to know we're getting rid of Norbert."Harry and Hermione didn't get a chance to answer. Madam Pomfrey cameover at that moment and made them leave, saying Ron needed sleep."It's too late to change the plan now," Harry told Hermione. "We haven'tgot time to send Charlie another owl, and this could be our only chanceto get rid of Norbert. We'll have to risk it. And we have got theinvisibility cloak, Malfoy doesn't know about that."They found Fang, the boarhound, sitting outside with a bandaged tailwhen they went to tell Hagrid, who opened a window to talk to them."I won't let you in," he puffed. "Norbert's at a tricky stage -- nothin'I can't handle."When they told him about Charlie's letter, his eyes filled with tears,although that might have been because Norbert had just bitten him on theleg."Aargh! It's all right, he only got my boot -- jus' playin' -- he's onlya baby, after all."The baby banged its tail on the wall, making the windows rattle. Harryand Hermione walked back to the castle feeling Saturday couldn't comequickly enough.They would have felt sorry for Hagrid when the time came for him to saygood-bye to Norbert if they hadn't been so worried about what they hadto do. It was a very dark, cloudy night, and they were a bit latearriving at Hagrid's hut because they'd had to wait for Peeves to getout of their way in the entrance hall, where he'd been playing tennisagainst the wall. Hagrid had Norbert packed and ready in a large crate."He's got lots o' rats an' some brandy fer the journey," said Hagrid ina muffled voice. "An' I've packed his teddy bear in case he getslonely."From inside the crate came ripping noises that sounded to Harry as




192though the teddy was having his head torn off."Bye-bye, Norbert!" Hagrid sobbed, as Harry and Hermione covered thecrate with the invisibility cloak and stepped underneath it themselves."Mommy will never forget you!"How they managed to get the crate back up to the castle, they neverknew. Midnight ticked nearer as they heaved Norbert up the marblestaircase in the entrance hall and along the dark corridors. UP anotherstaircase, then another -- even one of Harry's shortcuts didn't make thework much easier."Nearly there!" Harry panted as they reached the corridor beneath thetallest tower.Then a sudden movement ahead of them made them almost drop the crate.Forgetting that they were already invisible, they shrank into theshadows, staring at the dark outlines of two people grappling with eachother ten feet away. A lamp flared.Professor McGonagall, in a tartan bathrobe and a hair net, had Malfoy bythe ear."Detention!" she shouted. "And twenty points from Slytherin! Wanderingaround in the middle of the night, how dare you --""You don't understand, Professor. Harry Potter's coming -- he's got adragon!""What utter rubbish! How dare you tell such lies! Come on -- I shall seeProfessor Snape about you, Malfoy!"The steep spiral staircase up to the top of the tower seemed the easiestthing in the world after that. Not until they'd stepped out into thecold night air did they throw off the cloak, glad to be able to breatheproperly again. Hermione did a sort of jig."Malfoy's got detention! I could sing!""Don't," Harry advised her.Chuckling about Malfoy, they waited, Norbert thrashing about in hiscrate. About ten minutes later, four broomsticks came swooping down out




193of the darkness.Charlie's friends were a cheery lot. They showed Harry and Hermione theharness they'd rigged up, so they could suspend Norbert between them.They all helped buckle Norbert safely into it and then Harry andHermione shook hands with the others and thanked them very much.At last, Norbert was going... going... gone.They slipped back down the spiral staircase, their hearts as light astheir hands, now that Norbert was off them. No more dragon -- Malfoy indetention -- what could spoil their happiness?The answer to that was waiting at the foot of the stairs. As theystepped into the corridor, Filch's face loomed suddenly out of thedarkness."Well, well, well," he whispered, "we are in trouble."They'd left the invisibility cloak on top of the tower.CHAPTER FIFTEENTHE FORIBIDDEN FORESTThings couldn't have been worse.Filch took them down to Professor McGonagall's study on the first floor,where they sat and waited without saying a word to each other. Hermionewas trembling. Excuses, alibis, and wild cover- up stories chased eachother around Harry's brain, each more feeble than the last. He couldn'tsee how they were going to get out of trouble this time. They werecornered. How could they have been so stupid as to forget the cloak?There was no reason on earth that Professor McGonagall would accept fortheir being out of bed and creeping around the school in the dead ofnight, let alone being up the tallest astronomy tower, which wasout-of-bounds except for classes. Add Norbert and the invisibilitycloak, and they might as well be packing their bags already.Had Harry thought that things couldn't have been worse? He was wrong.When Professor McGonagall appeared, she was leading Neville.




194"Harry!" Neville burst Out, the moment he saw the other two. "I wastrying to find you to warn you, I heard Malfoy saying he was going tocatch you, he said you had a drag --"Harry shook his head violently to shut Neville up, but ProfessorMcGonagall had seen. She looked more likely to breathe fire than Norbertas she towered over the three of them."I would never have believed it of any of you. Mr. Filch says you wereup in the astronomy tower. It's one o'clock in the morning. Explainyourselves."It was the first time Hermione had ever failed to answer a teacher'squestion. She was staring at her slippers, as still as a statue."I think I've got a good idea of what's been going on," said ProfessorMcGonagall. "It doesn't take a genius to work it out. You fed DracoMalfoy some cock-and-bull story about a dragon, trying to get him out ofbed and into trouble. I've already caught him. I suppose you think it'sfunny that Longbottom here heard the story and believed it, too?"Harry caught Neville's eye and tried to tell him without words that thiswasn't true, because Neville was looking stunned and hurt. Poor,blundering Neville -- Harry knew what it must have cost him to try andfind them in the dark, to warn them."I'm disgusted," said Professor McGonagall. "Four students out of bed inone night! I've never heard of such a thing before! You, Miss Granger, Ithought you had more sense. As for you, Mr. Potter, I thought Gryffindormeant more to you than this. All three of you will receive detentions --yes, you too, Mr. Longbottom, nothing gives you the right to walk aroundschool at night, especially these days, it's very dangerous -- and fiftypoints will be taken from Gryffindor.""Fifty?" Harry gasped -- they would lose the lead, the lead he'd won inthe last Quidditch match."Fifty points each," said Professor McGonagall, breathing heavilythrough her long, pointed nose."Professor -- please"You can't --"




195"Don't tell me what I can and can't do, Potter. Now get back to bed, allof you. I've never been more ashamed of Gryffindor students."A hundred and fifty points lost. That put Gryffindor in last place. Inone night, they'd ruined any chance Gryffindor had had for the housecup. Harry felt as though the bottom had dropped out of his stomach. Howcould they ever make up for this?Harry didn't sleep all night. He could hear Neville sobbing into hispillow for what seemed like hours. Harry couldn't think of anything tosay to comfort him. He knew Neville, like himself, was dreading thedawn. What would happen when the rest of Gryffindor found out whatthey'd done?At first, Gryffindors passing the giant hourglasses that recorded thehouse points the next day thought there'd been a mistake. How could theysuddenly have a hundred and fifty points fewer than yesterday? And thenthe story started to spread: Harry Potter, the famous Harry Potter,their hero of two Quidditch matches, had lo st them all those points,him and a couple of other stupid first years.From being one of the most popular and admired people at the school,Harry was suddenly the most hated. Even Ravenclaws and Hufflepuffsturned on him, because everyone had been longing to see Slytherin losethe house cup. Everywhere Harry went, people pointed and didn't troubleto lower their voices as they insulted him. Slytherins, on the otherhand, clapped as he walked past them, whistling and cheering, "ThanksPotter, we owe you one!"Only Ron stood by him."They'll all forget this in a few weeks. Fred and George have lost loadsof points in all the time they've been here, and people still likethem.""They've never lost a hundred and fifty points in one go, though, havethey?" said Harry miserably."Well -- no," Ron admitted.It was a bit late to repair the damage, but Harry swore to himself notto meddle in things that weren't his business from now on. He'd had it




196with sneaking around and spying. He felt so ashamed of himself that hewent to Wood and offered to resign from the Quidditch team."Resign?" Wood thundered. "What good'll that do? How are we going to getany points back if we can't win at Quidditch?"But even Quidditch had lost its fun. The rest of the team wouldn't speakto Harry during practice, and if they had to speak about him, theycalled him "the Seeker."Hermione and Neville were suffering, too. They didn't have as bad a timeas Harry, because they weren't as well-known, but nobody would speak tothem, either. Hermione had stopped drawing attention to herself inclass, keeping her head down and working in silence.Harry was almost glad that the exams weren't far away. All the studyinghe had to do kept his mind off his misery. He, Ron, and Hermione kept tothemselves, working late into the night, trying to remember theingredients in complicated potions, learn charms and spells by heart,memorize the dates of magical discoveries and goblin rebellions....Then, about a week before the exams were due to start, Harry's newresolution not to interfere in anything that didn't concern him was putto an unexpected test. Walking back from the library on his own oneafternoon, he heard somebody whimpering from a classroom up ahead. As hedrew closer, he heard Quirrell's voice."No -- no -- not again, please --"It sounded as though someone was threatening him. Harry moved closer."All right -- all right --" he heard Quirrell sob.Next second, Quirrell came hurrying out of the classroom straighteninghis turban. He was pale and looked as though he was about to cry. Hestrode out of sight; Harry didn't think Quirrell had even noticed him.He waited until Quirrell's footsteps had disappeared, then peered intothe classroom. It was empty, but a door stood ajar at the other end.Harry was halfway toward it before he remembered what he'd promisedhimself about not meddling.All the same, he'd have gambled twelve Sorcerer's Stones that Snape hadjust left the room, and from what Harry had just heard, Snape would be




197walking with a new spring in his step -- Quirrell seemed to have givenin at last.Harry went back to the library, where Hermione was testing Ron onAstronomy. Harry told them what he'd heard."Snape's done it, then!" said Ron. "If Quirrell's told him how to breakhis Anti-Dark Force spell --""There's still Fluffy, though," said Hermione."Maybe Snape's found out how to get past him without asking Hagrid,"said Ron, looking up at the thousands of books surrounding them. "I betthere's a book somewhere in here telling you how to get past a giantthree-headed dog. So what do we do, Harry?"The light of adventure was kindling again in Ron's eyes, but Hermioneanswered before Harry could."Go to Dumbledore. That's what we should have done ages ago. If we tryanything ourselves we'll be thrown out for sure.""But we've got no proof!" said Harry. "Quirrell's too scared to back usup. Snape's only got to say he doesn't know how the troll got in atHalloween and that he was nowhere near the third floor -- who do youthink they'll believe, him or us? It's not exactly a secret we hate him,Dumbledore'll think we made it up to get him sacked. Filch wouldn't helpus if his life depended on it, he's too friendly with Snape, and themore students get thrown out, the better, he'll think. And don't forget,we're not supposed to know about the Stone or Fluffy. That'll take a lotof explaining."Hermione looked convinced, but Ron didn't."If we just do a bit of poking around --""No," said Harry flatly, "we've done enough poking around."He pulled a map of Jupiter toward him and started to learn the names ofits moons.The following morning, notes were delivered to Harry, Hermione, andNeville at the breakfast table. They were all the same:




198Your detention will take place at eleven o'clock tonight. Meet Mr. Filchin the entrance hall.Professor McGonagall Harry had forgotten they still had detentions to doin the furor over the points they'd lost. He half expected Hermione tocomplain that this was a whole night of studying lost, but she didn'tsay a word. Like Harry, she felt they deserved what they'd got.At eleven o'clock that night, they said good-bye to Ron in the commonroom and went down to the entrance hall with Neville. Filch was alreadythere -- and so was Malfoy. Harry had also forgotten that Malfoy hadgotten a detention, too."Follow me," said Filch, lighting a lamp and leading them outside.I bet you'll think twice about breaking a school rule again, won't you,eh?" he said, leering at them. "Oh yes... hard work and pain are thebest teachers if you ask me.... It's just a pity they let the oldpunishments die out... hang you by your wrists from the ceiling for afew days, I've got the chains still in my office, keep 'em well oiled incase they're ever needed.... Right, off we go, and don't think ofrunning off, now, it'll be worse for you if you do."They marched off across the dark grounds. Neville kept sniffing. Harrywondered what their punishment was going to be. It must be somethingreally horrible, or Filch wouldn't be sounding so delighted.The moon was bright, but clouds scudding across it kept throwing theminto darkness. Ahead, Harry could see the lighted windows of Hagrid'shut. Then they heard a distant shout."Is that you, Filch? Hurry up, I want ter get started."Harry's heart rose; if they were going to be working with Hagrid itwouldn't be so bad. His relief must have showed in his -face, becauseFilch said, "I suppose you think you'll be enjoying yourself with thatoaf? Well, think again, boy -- it's into the forest you're going and I'mmuch mistaken if you'll all come out in one piece."At this, Neville let out a little moan, and Malfoy stopped dead in histracks.




199"The forest?" he repeated, and he didn't sound quite as cool as usual."We can't go in there at night -- there's all sorts of things in there-- werewolves, I heard."Neville clutched the sleeve of Harry's robe and made a choking noise."That's your problem, isn't it?" said Filch, his voice cracking withglee. "Should've thought of them werewolves before you got in trouble,shouldn't you?"Hagrid came striding toward them out of the dark, Fang at his heel. Hewas carrying his large crossbow, and a quiver of arrows hung over hisshoulder."Abou' time," he said. "I bin waitin' fer half an hour already. Allright, Harry, Hermione?""I shouldn't be too friendly to them, Hagrid," said Filch coldly,they're here to be punished, after all.""That's why yer late, is it?" said Hagrid, frowning at Filch. "Binlecturin' them, eh? 'Snot your place ter do that. Yeh've done yer bit,I'll take over from here.""I'll be back at dawn," said Filch, "for what's left of them," he addednastily, and he turned and started back toward the castle, his lampbobbing away in the darkness.Malfoy now turned to Hagrid."I'm not going in that forest, he said, and Harry was pleased to hearthe note of panic in his voice."Yeh are if yeh want ter stay at Hogwarts," said Hagrid fiercely."Yeh've done wrong an' now yehve got ter pay fer it.""But this is servant stuff, it's not for students to do. I thought we'dbe copying lines or something, if my father knew I was doing this, he'dtell yer that's how it is at Hogwarts," Hagrid growled. "Copyin' lines!What good's that ter anyone? Yeh'll do summat useful or Yeh'll get out.If yeh think yer father'd rather you were expelled, then get back offter the castle an' pack. Go on"'




200Malfoy didn't move. He looked at Hagrid furiously, but then dropped hisgaze."Right then," said Hagrid, "now, listen carefully, 'cause it's dangerouswhat we're gonna do tonight, an' I don' want no one takin' risks. Followme over here a moment."He led them to the very edge of the forest. Holding his lamp up high, hepointed down a narrow, winding earth track that disappeared into thethick black trees. A light breeze lifted their hair as they looked intothe forest."Look there," said Hagrid, "see that stuff shinin' on the ground?Silvery stuff? That's unicorn blood. There's a unicorn in there bin hurtbadly by summat. This is the second time in a week. I found one deadlast Wednesday. We're gonna try an' find the poor thing. We might haveter put it out of its misery.""And what if whatever hurt the unicorn finds us first?" said Malfoy,unable to keep the fear out of his voice."There's nothin' that lives in the forest that'll hurt yeh if yer withme or Fang," said Hagrid. "An' keep ter the path. Right, now, we'regonna split inter two parties an' follow the trail in diff'rentdirections. There's blood all over the place, it must've bin staggerin'around since last night at least.""I want Fang," said Malfoy quickly, looking at Fang's long teeth."All right, but I warn yeh, he's a coward," said Hagrid. " So me, Harry,an' Hermione'll go one way an' Draco, Neville, an' Fang'll go the other.Now, if any of us finds the unicorn, we'll send up green sparks, right?Get yer wands out an' practice now -- that's it -- an' if anyone gets introuble, send up red sparks, an' we'll all come an' find yeh -- so, becareful -- let's go."The forest was black and silent. A little way into it they reached afork in the earth path, and Harry, Hermione, and Hagrid took the leftpath while Malfoy, Neville, and Fang took the right.They walked in silence, their eyes on the ground. Every now and then aray of moonlight through the branches above lit a spot of silver-blue




201blood on the fallen leaves.Harry saw that Hagrid looked very worried."Could a werewolf be killing the unicorns?" Harry asked."Not fast enough," said Hagrid. "It's not easy ter catch a unicorn,they're powerful magic creatures. I never knew one ter be hurt before."They walked past a mossy tree stump. Harry could hear running water;there must be a stream somewhere close by. There were still spots ofunicorn blood here and there along the winding path."You all right, Hermione?" Hagrid whispered. "Don' worry, it can't'vegone far if it's this badly hurt, an' then we'll be able ter -- GETBEHIND THAT TREE!"Hagrid seized Harry and Hermione and hoisted them off the path behind atowering oak. He pulled out an arrow and fitted it into his crossbow,raising it, ready to fire. The three of them listened. Something wasslithering over dead leaves nearby: it sounded like a cloak trailingalong the ground. Hagrid was squinting up the dark path, but after a fewseconds, the sound faded away."I knew it, " he murmured. "There's summat in here that shouldn' be.""A werewolf?" Harry suggested."That wasn' no werewolf an' it wasn' no unicorn, neither," said Hagridgrimly. "Right, follow me, but careful, now."They walked more slowly, ears straining for the faintest sound.Suddenly, in a clearing ahead, something definitely moved."Who's there?" Hagrid called. "Show yerself -- I'm armed!"And into the clearing came -- was it a man, or a horse? To the waist, aman, with red hair and beard, but below that was a horse's gleamingchestnut body with a long, reddish tail. Harry and Hermione's jawsdropped."Oh, it's you, Ronan," said Hagrid in relief. "How are yeh?"




202He walked forward and shook the centaur's hand."Good evening to you, Hagrid," said Ronan. He had a deep, sorrowfulvoice. "Were you going to shoot me?""Can't be too careful, Ronan," said Hagrid, patting his crossbow."There's summat bad loose in this forest. This is Harry Potter an'Hermione Granger, by the way. Students up at the school. An' this isRonan, you two. He's a centaur.))"We'd noticed," said Hermione faintly."Good evening," said Ronan. "Students, are you? And do you learn much,up at the school?""Erm --""A bit," said Hermione timidly."A bit. Well, that's something." Ronan sighed. He flung back his headand stared at the sky. "Mars is bright tonight.""Yeah," said Hagrid, glancing up, too. "Listen, I'm glad we've run interyeh, Ronan, 'cause there's a unicorn bin hurt -- you seen anythin'?"Ronan didn't answer immediately. He stared unblinkingly upward, thensighed again."Always the innocent are the first victims," he said. "So it has beenfor ages past, so it is now.""Yeah," said Hagrid, "but have yeh seen anythin', Ronan? Anythin'unusual?""Mars is bright tonight," Ronan repeated, while Hagrid watched himimpatiently. "Unusually bright.""Yeah, but I was meanin' anythin' unusual a bit nearer home, saidHagrid. "So yeh haven't noticed anythin' strange?"Yet again, Ronan took a while to answer. At last, he said, "The foresthides many secrets."




203A movement in the trees behind Ronan made Hagrid raise his bow again,but it was only a second centaur, black-haired and -bodied andwilder-looking than Ronan."Hullo, Bane," said Hagrid. "All right?""Good evening, Hagrid, I hope you are well?""Well enough. Look, I've jus' bin askin' Ronan, you seen anythin' odd inhere lately? There's a unicorn bin injured -- would yeh know anythin'about it?"Bane walked over to stand next to Ronan. He looked skyward. "Mars isbright tonight," he said simply."We've heard," said Hagrid grumpily. "Well, if either of you do seeanythin', let me know, won't yeh? We'll be off, then."Harry and Hermione followed him out of the clearing, staring over theirshoulders at Ronan and Bane until the trees blocked their view."Never," said Hagrid irritably, "try an' get a straight answer out of acentaur. Ruddy stargazers. Not interested in anythin' closer'n themoon.""Are there many of them in here?" asked Hermione."Oh, a fair few... Keep themselves to themselves mostly, but they'regood enough about turnin' up if ever I want a word. They're deep, mind,centaurs... they know things... jus' don' let on much.""D'you think that was a centaur we heard earlier?" said Harry."Did that sound like hooves to you? Nah, if yeh ask me, that was what'sbin killin' the unicorns -- never heard anythin' like it before."They walked on through the dense, dark trees. Harry kept lookingnervously over his shoulder. He had the nasty feeling they were beingwatched. He was very glad they had Hagrid and his crossbow with them.They had just passed a bend in the path when Hermione grabbed Hagrid'sarm."Hagrid! Look! Red sparks, the others are in trouble!"




204"You two wait here!" Hagrid shouted. "Stay on the path, I'll come backfor yeh!"They heard him crashing away through the undergrowth and stood lookingat each other, very scared, until they couldn't hear anything but therustling of leaves around them."You don't think they've been hurt, do you?" whispered Hermione."I don't care if Malfoy has, but if something's got Neville... it's ourfault he's here in the first place."The minutes dragged by. Their ears seemed sharper than usual. Harry'sseemed to be picking up every sigh of the wind, every cracking twig.What was going on? Where were the others?At last, a great crunching noise announced Hagrid's return. Malfoy,Neville, and Fang were with him. Hagrid was fuming. Malfoy, it seemed,had sneaked up behind Neville and grabbed him as a joke. Neville hadpanicked and sent up the sparks."We'll be lucky ter catch anythin' now, with the racket you two weremakin'. Right, we're changin' groups -- Neville, you stay with me an'Hermione, Harry, you go with Fang an' this idiot. I'm sorry," Hagridadded in a whisper to Harry, "but he'll have a harder time frightenin'you, an' we've gotta get this done."So Harry set off into the heart of the forest with Malfoy and Fang. Theywalked for nearly half an hour, deeper and deeper into the forest, untilthe path became almost impossible to follow because the trees were sothick. Harry thought the blood seemed to be getting thicker. There weresplashes on the roots of a tree, as though the poor creature had beenthrashing around in pain close by. Harry could see a clearing ahead,through the tangled branches of an ancient oak."Look --" he murmured, holding out his arm to stop Malfoy.Something bright white was gleaming on the ground. They inched closer.It was the unicorn all right, and it was dead. Harry had never seenanything so beautiful and sad. Its long, slender legs were stuck out atodd angles where it had fallen and its mane was spread pearly-white on




205the dark leaves.Harry had taken one step toward it when a slithering sound made himfreeze where he stood. A bush on the edge of the clearing quivered....Then, out of the shadows, a hooded figure came crawling across theground like some stalking beast. Harry, Malfoy, and Fang stoodtransfixed. The cloaked figure reached the unicorn, lowered its headover the wound in the animal's side, and began to drink its blood."AAAAAAAAAARGH!"Malfoy let out a terrible scream and bolted -- so did Fang. The hoodedfigure raised its head and looked right at Harry -- unicorn blood wasdribbling down its front. It got to its feet and came swiftly towardHarry -- he couldn't move for fear.Then a pain like he'd never felt before pierced his head; it was asthough his scar were on fire. Half blinded, he staggered backward. Heheard hooves behind him, galloping, and something jumped clean overHarry, charging at the figure.The pain in Harry's head was so bad he fell to his knees. It took aminute or two to pass. When he looked up, the figure had gone. A centaurwas standing over him, not Ronan or Bane; this one looked younger; hehad white-blond hair and a palomino body."Are you all right?" said the centaur, pulling Harry to his feet."Yes -- thank you -- what was that?"The centaur didn't answer. He had astonishingly blue eyes, like palesapphires. He looked carefully at Harry, his eyes lingering on the scarthat stood out, livid, on Harry's forehead."You are the Potter boy," he said. "You had better get back to Hagrid.The forest is not safe at this time -- especially for you. Can you ride?It will be quicker this way."My name is Firenze," he added, as he lowered himself on to his frontlegs so that Harry could clamber onto his back.There was suddenly a sound of more galloping from the other side of theclearing. Ronan and Bane came bursting through the trees, their flanks




206heaving and sweaty."Firenze!" Bane thundered. "What are you doing? You have a human on yourback! Have you no shame? Are you a common mule?""Do you realize who this is?" said Firenze. "This is the Potter boy. Thequicker he leaves this forest, the better.""What have you been telling him?" growled Bane. "Remember, Firenze, weare sworn not to set ourselves against the heavens. Have we not readwhat is to come in the movements of the planets?"Ronan pawed the ground nervously. "I'm sure Firenze thought he wasacting for the best, " he said in his gloomy voice.Bane kicked his back legs in anger."For the best! What is that to do with us? Centaurs are concerned withwhat has been foretold! It is not our business to run around likedonkeys after stray humans in our forest!"Firenze suddenly reared on to his hind legs in anger, so that Harry hadto grab his shoulders to stay on."Do you not see that unicorn?" Firenze bellowed at Bane. "Do you notunderstand why it was killed? Or have the planets not let you in on thatsecret? I set myself against what is lurking in this forest, Bane, yes,with humans alongside me if I must."And Firenze whisked around; with Harry clutching on as best he could,they plunged off into the trees, leaving Ronan and Bane behind them.Harry didn't have a clue what was going on."Why's Bane so angry?" he asked. "What was that thing you saved me from,anyway?"Firenze slowed to a walk, warned Harry to keep his head bowed in case oflow-hanging branches, but did not answer Harry's question. They madetheir way through the trees in silence for so long that Harry thoughtFirenze didn't want to talk to him anymore. They were passing through aparticularly dense patch of trees, however, when Firenze suddenlystopped.




207"Harry Potter, do you know what unicorn blood is used -for?""No," said Harry, startled by the odd question. "We've only used thehorn and tail hair in Potions.""That is because it is a monstrous thing, to slay a unicorn," saidFirenze. "Only one who has nothing to lose, and everything to gain,would commit such a crime. The blood of a unicorn will keep you alive,even if you are an inch from death, but at a terrible price. You haveslain something pure and defenseless to save yourself, and you will havebut a half-life, a cursed life, from the moment the blood touches yourlips."Harry stared at the back of Firenze's head, which was dappled silver inthe moonlight."But who'd be that desperate?" he wondered aloud. "If you're going to becursed forever, deaths better, isn't it?""It is," Firenze agreed, "unless all you need is to stay alive longenough to drink something else -- something that will bring you back tofull strength and power -- something that will mean you can never die.Mr. Potter, do you know what is hidden in the school at this verymoment?""The Sorcerer's Stone! Of course -- the Elixir of Life! But I don'tunderstand who --""Can you think of nobody who has waited many years to return to power,who has clung to life, awaiting their chance?"It was as though an iron fist had clenched suddenly around Harry'sheart. Over the rustling of the trees, he seemed to hear once more whatHagrid had told him on the night they had met: "Some say he died.Codswallop, in my opinion. Dunno if he had enough human left in him todie.""Do you mean," Harry croaked, "that was Vol-""Harry! Harry, are you all right?"Hermione was running toward them down the path, Hagrid puffing along




208behind her."I'm fine," said Harry, hardly knowing what he was saying. "Theunicorn's dead, Hagrid, it's in that clearing back there.""This is where I leave you," Firenze murmured as Hagrid hurried off toexamine the unicorn. "You are safe now."Harry slid off his back."Good luck, Harry Potter," said Firenze. "The planets have been readwrongly before now, even by centaurs. I hope this is one of thosetimes."He turned and cantered back into the depths of the forest, leaving Harryshivering behind him.Ron had fallen asleep in the dark common room, waiting for them toreturn. He shouted something about Quidditch fouls when Harry roughlyshook him awake. In a matter of seconds, though, he was wide-eyed asHarry began to tell him and Hermione what had happened in the forest.Harry couldn't sit down. He paced up and down in front of the fire. Hewas still shaking."Snape wants the stone for Voldemort... and Voldemort's waiting in theforest... and all this time we thought Snape just wanted to getrich....""Stop saying the name!" said Ron in a terrified whisper, as if hethought Voldemort could hear them.Harry wasn't listening."Firenze saved me, but he shouldn't have done so.... Bane was furious...he was talking about interfering with what the planets say is going tohappen.... They must show that Voldemort's coming back.... Bane thinksFirenze should have let Voldemort kill me.... I suppose that's writtenin the stars as well.""Will you stop saying the name!" Ron hissed."So all I've got to wait for now is Snape to steal the Stone," Harry




209went on feverishly, "then Voldemort will be able to come and finish meoff... Well, I suppose Bane'll be happy."Hermione looked very frightened, but she had a word of comfort."Harry, everyone says Dumbledore's the only one You-Know-Who was everafraid of With Dumbledore around, You-Know-Who won't touch you. Anyway,who says the centaurs are right? It sounds like fortune-telling to me,and Professor McGonagall says that's a very imprecise branch of magic."The sky had turned light before they stopped talking. They went to bedexhausted, their throats sore. But the night's surprises weren't over.When Harry pulled back his sheets, he found his invisibility cloakfolded neatly underneath them. There was a note pinned to it:Just in case.CHAPTER SIXTEENTHROUGH THE TRAPDOORIn years to come, Harry would never quite remember how he had managed toget through his exams when he half expected Voldemort to come burstingthrough the door at any moment. Yet the days crept by, and there couldbe no doubt that Fluffy was still alive and well behind the locked door.It was sweltering hot, especially in the large classroom where they didtheir written papers. They had been given special, new quills for theexams, which had been bewitched with an AntiCheating spell.They had practical exams as well. Professor Flitwick called them one byone into his class to see if they could make a pineapple tapdance acrossa desk. Professor McGonagall watched them turn a mouse into a snuffbox-- points were given for how pretty the snuffbox was, but taken away ifit had whiskers. Snape made them all nervous, breathing down their neckswhile they tried to remember how to make a Forgetfulness potion.Harry did the best he could, trying to ignore the stabbing pains in hisforehead, which had been bothering him ever since his trip into theforest. Neville thought Harry had a bad case of exam nerves becauseHarry couldn't sleep, but the truth was that Harry kept being woken by




210his old nightmare, except that it was now worse than ever because therewas a hooded figure dripping blood in it.Maybe it was because they hadn't seen what Harry had seen in the forest,or because they didn't have scars burning on their foreheads, but Ronand Hermione didn't seem as worried about the Stone as Harry. The ideaof Voldemort certainly scared them, but he didn't keep visiting them indreams, and they were so busy with their studying they didn't have muchtime to fret about what Snape or anyone else might be up to.Their very last exam was History of Magic. One hour of answeringquestions about batty old wizards who'd invented selfstirring cauldronsand they'd be free, free for a whole wonderful week until their examresults came out. When the ghost of Professor Binns told them to putdown their quills and roll up their parchment, Harry couldn't helpcheering with the rest."That was far easier than I thought it would be," said Hermione as theyjoined the crowds flocking out onto the sunny grounds. "I needn't havelearned about the 1637 Werewolf Code of Conduct or the uprising ofElfric the Eager."Hermione always liked to go through their exam papers afterward, but Ronsaid this made him feel ill, so they wandered down to the lake andflopped under a tree. The Weasley twins and Lee Jordan were tickling thetentacles of a giant squid, which was basking in the warm shallows. "Nomore studying," Ron sighed happily, stretching out on the grass. "Youcould look more cheerful, Harry, we've got a week before we find out howbadly we've done, there's no need to worry yet."Harry was rubbing his forehead."I wish I knew what this means!" he burst out angrily. "My scar keepshurting -- it's happened before, but never as often as this.""Go to Madam Pomfrey," Hermione suggested."I'm not ill," said Harry. "I think it's a warning... it means danger'scoming...."Ron couldn't get worked up, it was too hot."Harry, relax, Hermione's right, the Stone's safe as long as




211Dumbledore's around. Anyway, we've never had any proof Snape found outhow to get past Fluffy. He nearly had his leg ripped off once, he's notgoing to try it again in a hurry. And Neville will play Quidditch forEngland before Hagrid lets Dumbledore down."Harry nodded, but he couldn't shake off a lurking feeling that there wassomething he'd forgotten to do, something important. When he tried toexplain this, Hermione said, "That's just the exams. I woke up lastnight and was halfway through my Transfiguration notes before Iremembered we'd done that one."Harry was quite sure the unsettled feeling didn't have anything to dowith work, though. He watched an owl flutter toward the school acrossthe bright blue sky, a note clamped in its mouth. Hagrid was the onlyone who ever sent him letters. Hagrid would never betray Dumbledore.Hagrid would never tell anyone how to get past Fluffy... never... but --Harry suddenly jumped to his feet."Where're you going?" said Ron sleepily."I've just thought of something," said Harry. He had turned white."We've got to go and see Hagrid, now.""Why?" panted Hermione, hurrying to keep up."Don't you think it's a bit odd," said Harry, scrambling up the grassyslope, "that what Hagrid wants more than anything else is a dragon, anda stranger turns up who just happens to have an egg in his pocket? Howmany people wander around with dragon eggs if it's against wizard law?Lucky they found Hagrid, don't you think? Why didn't I see it before?""What are you talking about?" said Ron, but Harry, sprinting across thegrounds toward the forest, didn't answer.Hagrid was sitting in an armchair outside his house; his trousers andsleeves were rolled up, and he was shelling peas into a large bowl."Hullo," he said, smiling. "Finished yer exams? Got time fer a drink?""Yes, please," said Ron, but Harry cut him off."No, we're in a hurry. Hagrid, I've got to ask you something. You know




212that night you won Norbert? What did the stranger you were playing cardswith look like?""Dunno," said Hagrid casually, "he wouldn' take his cloak off."He saw the three of them look stunned and raised his eyebrows."It's not that unusual, yeh get a lot o' funny folk in the Hog's Head --that's the pub down in the village. Mighta bin a dragon dealer, mightn'he? I never saw his face, he kept his hood up."Harry sank down next to the bowl of peas. "What did you talk to himabout, Hagrid? Did you mention Hogwarts at all?""Mighta come up," said Hagrid, frowning as he tried to remember."Yeah... he asked what I did, an' I told him I was gamekeeper here....He asked a bit about the sorta creatures I took after... so I toldhim... an' I said what I'd always really wanted was a dragon... an'then... I can' remember too well, 'cause he kept buyin' me drinks....Let's see... yeah, then he said he had the dragon egg an' we could playcards fer it if I wanted... but he had ter be sure I could handle it, hedidn' want it ter go ter any old home.... So I told him, after Fluffy, adragon would be easy...""And did he -- did he seem interested in Fluffy?" Harry asked, try ingto keep his voice calm."Well -- yeah -- how many three-headed dogs d'yeh meet, even aroundHogwarts? So I told him, Fluffy's a piece o' cake if yeh know how tocalm him down, jus' play him a bit o' music an' he'll go straight offter sleep --"Hagrid suddenly looked horrified."I shouldn'ta told yeh that!" he blurted out. "Forget I said it! Hey --where're yeh goin'?"Harry, Ron, and Hermione didn't speak to each other at all until theycame to a halt in the entrance hall, which seemed very cold and gloomyafter the grounds."We've got to go to Dumbledore," said Harry. "Hagrid told that strangerhow to get past Fluffy, and it was either Snape or Voldemort under that




213cloak -- it must've been easy, once he'd got Hagrid drunk. I just hopeDumbledore believes us. Firenze might back us up if Bane doesn't stophim. Where's Dumbledore's office?"They looked around, as if hoping to see a sign pointing them in theright direction. They had never been told where Dumbledore lived, nordid they know anyone who had been sent to see him."We'll just have to --" Harry began, but a voice suddenly rang acrossthe hall."What are you three doing inside?"It was Professor McGonagall, carrying a large pile of books."We want to see Professor Dumbledore," said Hermione, rather bravely,Harry and Ron thought."See Professor Dumbledore?" Professor McGonagall repeated, as thoughthis was a very fishy thing to want to do. "Why?"Harry swallowed -- now what?"It's sort of secret," he said, but he wished at once he hadn't, becauseProfessor McGonagall's nostrils flared."Professor Dumbledore left ten minutes ago," she said coldly. "Hereceived an urgent owl from the Ministry of Magic and flew off forLondon at once.""He's gone?" said Harry frantically. "Now?""Professor Dumbledore is a very great wizard, Potter, he has manydemands on his time --"But this is important.""Something you have to say is more important than the Ministry of Magic,Potter."Look," said Harry, throwing caution to the winds, "Professor -- it'sabout the Sorcerer's tone --"




214Whatever Professor McGonagall had expected, it wasn't that. The booksshe was carrying tumbled out of her arms, but she didn't pick them up."How do you know --?" she spluttered."Professor, I think -- I know -- that Sn- that someone's going to tryand steal the Stone. I've got to talk to Professor Dumbledore."She eyed him with a mixture of shock and suspicion."Professor Dumbledore will be back tomorrow," she said finally. I don'tknow how you found out about the Stone, but rest assured, no one canpossibly steal it, it's too well protected.""But Professor --""Potter, I know what I'm talking about," she said shortly. She bent downand gathered up the fallen books. I suggest you all go back outside andenjoy the sunshine."But they didn't."It's tonight," said Harry, once he was sure Professor McGonagall wasout of earshot. "Snape's going through the trapdoor tonight. He's foundout everything he needs, and now he's got Dumbledore out of the way. Hesent that note, I bet the Ministry of Magic will get a real shock whenDumbledore turns up.""But what can we --"Hermione gasped. Harry and Ron wheeled round.Snape was standing there."Good afternoon," he said smoothly.They stared at him."You shouldn't be inside on a day like this," he said, with an odd,twisted smile."We were --" Harry began, without any idea what he was going to say."You want to be more careful," said Snape. "Hanging around




215like this, people will think you're up to something. And Gryffindorreally can't afford to lose any more points, can it?"Harry flushed. They turned to go outside, but Snape called them back."Be warned, Potter -- any more nighttime wanderings and I willpersonally make sure you are expelled. Good day to you."He strode off in the direction of the staffroom.Out on the stone steps, Harry turned to the others."Right, here's what we've got to do," he whispered urgently. "One of ushas got to keep an eye on Snape -- wait outside the staff room andfollow him if he leaves it. Hermione, you'd better do that.""Why me?""It's obvious," said Ron. "You can pretend to be waiting for ProfessorFlitwick, you know." He put on a high voice, "'Oh Professor Flitwick,I'm so worried, I think I got question fourteen b wrong....'""Oh, shut up," said Hermione, but she agreed to go and watch out forSnape."And we'd better stay outside the third-floor corridor," Harry told Ron."Come on."But that part of the plan didn't work. No sooner had they reached thedoor separating Fluffy from the rest of the school than ProfessorMcGonagall turned up again and this time, she lost her temper."I suppose you think you're harder to get past than a pack ofenchantments!" she stormed. "Enough of this nonsense! If I hear you 'vecome anywhere near here again, I'll take another fifty points fromGryffindor! Yes, Weasley, from my own house!" Harry and Ron went back tothe common room, Harry had just said, "At least Hermione's on Snape'stail," when the portrait of the Fat Lady swung open and Hermione camein."I'm sorry, Harry!" she wailed. "Snape came out and asked me what I wasdoing, so I said I was waiting for Flitwick, and Snape went to get him,




216and I've only just got away, I don't know where Snape went.""Well, that's it then, isn't it?" Harry said.The other two stared at him. He was pale and his eyes were glittering."I'm going out of here tonight and I'm going to try and get to the Stonefirst.""You're mad!" said Ron."You can't!" said Hermione. "After what McGonagall and Snape have said?You'll be expelled!""SO WHAP" Harry shouted. "Don't you understand? If Snape gets hold ofthe Stone, Voldemort's coming back! Haven't you heard what it was likewhen he was trying to take over? There won't be any Hogwarts to getexpelled from! He'll flatten it, or turn it into a school for the DarkArts! Losing points doesn't matter anymore, can't you see? D'you thinkhe'll leave you and your families alone if Gryffindor wins the housecup? If I get caught before I can get to the Stone, well, I'll have togo back to the Dursleys and wait for Voldemort to find me there, it'sonly dying a bit later than I would have, because I'm never going overto the Dark Side! I'm going through that trapdoor tonight and nothingyou two say is going to stop me! Voldemort killed my parents, remember?"He glared at them."You're right Harry," said Hermione in a small voice."I'll use the invisibility cloak," said Harry. "It's just lucky I got itback.""But will it cover all three of us?" said Ron."All -- all three of us?""Oh, come off it, you don't think we'd let you go alone?""Of course not," said Hermione briskly. "How do you think you'd get tothe Stone without us? I'd better go and took through my books, theremight be something useful..."




217"But if we get caught, you two will be expelled, too.""Not if I can help it," said Hermione grimly. "Flitwick told me insecret that I got a hundred and twelve percent on his exam. They're notthrowing me out after that."After dinner the three of them sat nervously apart in the common room.Nobody bothered them; none of the Gryffindors had anything to say toHarry any more, after all. This was the first night he hadn't been upsetby it. Hermione was skimming through all her notes, hoping to comeacross one of the enchantments they were about to try to break. Harryand Ron didn't talk much. Both of them were thinking about what theywere about to do.Slowly, the room emptied as people drifted off to bed."Better get the cloak," Ron muttered, as Lee Jordan finally left,stretching and yawning. Harry ran upstairs to their dark dormitory. Heputted out the cloak and then his eyes fell on the flute Hagrid hadgiven him for Christmas. He pocketed it to use on Fluffy -- he didn'tfeel much like singing.He ran back down to the common room."We'd better put the cloak on here, and make sure it covers all three ofus -- if Filch spots one of our feet wandering along on its own --""What are you doing?" said a voice from the corner of the room. Nevilleappeared from behind an armchair, clutching Trevor the toad, who lookedas though he'd been making another bid for freedom."Nothing, Neville, nothing," said Harry, hurriedly putting the cloakbehind his back.Neville stared at their guilty faces."You're going out again," he said."No, no, no," said Hermione. "No, we're not. Why don't you go to bed,Neville?"Harry looked at the grandfather clock by the door. They couldn't affordto waste any more time, Snape might even now be playing Fluffy to sleep.




218"You can't go out," said Neville, "you'll be caught again. Gryffindorwill be in even more trouble.""You don't understand," said Harry, "this is important."But Neville was clearly steeling himself to do something desperate.I won't let you do it," he said, hurrying to stand in front of theportrait hole. "I'll -- I'll fight you!""Neville, "Ron exploded, "get away from that hole and don't be an idiot--""Don't you call me an idiot!" said Neville. I don't think you should bebreaking any more rules! And you were the one who told me to stand up topeople!""Yes, but not to us," said Ron in exasperation. "Neville, you don't knowwhat you're doing."He took a step forward and Neville dropped Trevor the toad, who leaptout of sight."Go on then, try and hit me!" said Neville, raising his fists. "I'mready!"Harry turned to Hermione."Do something," he said desperately.Hermione stepped forward."Neville," she said, "I'm really, really sorry about this."She raised her wand."Petrificus Totalus!" she cried, pointing it at Neville.Neville's arms snapped to his sides. His legs sprang together. His wholebody rigid, he swayed where he stood and then fell flat on his face,stiff as a board.




219Hermione ran to turn him over. Neville's jaws were jammed together so hecouldn't speak. Only his eyes were moving, looking at them in horror."What've you done to him?" Harry whispered."It's the full Body-Bind," said Hermione miserably. "Oh, Neville, I'm sosorry.""We had to, Neville, no time to explain," said Harry."You'll understand later, Neville," said Ron as they stepped over himand pulled on the invisibility cloak.But leaving Neville lying motionless on the floor didn't feel like avery good omen. In their nervous state, every statue's shadow lookedlike Filch, every distant breath of wind sounded like Peeves swoopingdown on them. At the foot of the first set of stairs, they spotted Mrs.Norris skulking near the top."Oh, let's kick her, just this once," Ron whispered in Harry's ear, butHarry shook his head. As they climbed carefully around her, Mrs. Norristurned her lamplike eyes on them, but didn't do anything.They didn't meet anyone else until they reached the staircase up to thethird floor. Peeves was bobbing halfway up, loosening the carpet so thatpeople would trip."Who's there?" he said suddenly as they climbed toward him. He narrowedhis wicked black eyes. "Know you're there, even if I can't see you. Areyou ghoulie or ghostie or wee student beastie?"He rose up in the air and floated there, squinting at them."Should call Filch, I should, if something's a-creeping around unseen."Harry had a sudden idea."Peeves," he said, in a hoarse whisper, "the Bloody Baron has his ownreasons for being invisible."Peeves almost fell out of the air in shock. He caught himself in timeand hovered about a foot off the stairs.




220"So sorry, your bloodiness, Mr. Baron, Sir," he said greasily. "Mymistake, my mistake -- I didn't see you -- of course I didn't, you'reinvisible -- forgive old Peevsie his little joke, sir.""I have business here, Peeves," croaked Harry. "Stay away from thisplace tonight.""I will, sir, I most certainly will," said Peeves, rising up in the airagain. "Hope your business goes well, Baron, I'll not bother you."And he scooted off"Brilliant, Harry!" whispered Ron.A few seconds later, they were there, outside the third-floor corridor-- and the door was already ajar."Well, there you are," Harry said quietly, "Snape's already got pastFluffy."Seeing the open door somehow seemed to impress upon all three of themwhat was facing them. Underneath the cloak, Harry turned to the othertwo."If you want to go back, I won't blame you," he said. "You can take thecloak, I won't need it now.""Don't be stupid," said Ron."We're coming," said Hermione.Harry pushed the door open.As the door creaked, low, rumbling growls met their ears. All three ofthe dog's noses sniffed madly in their direction, even though itcouldn't see them."What's that at its feet?" Hermione whispered."Looks like a harp," said Ron. "Snape must have left it there.""It must wake up the moment you stop playing," said Harry. "Well, heregoes..."




221He put Hagrid's flute to his lips and blew. It wasn't really a tune, butfrom the first note the beast's eyes began to droop. Harry hardly drewbreath. Slowly, the dog's growls ceased -- it tottered on its paws andfell to its knees, then it slumped to the ground, fast asleep."Keep playing," Ron warned Harry as they slipped out of the cloak andcrept toward the trapdoor. They could feel the dog's hot, smelly breathas they approached the giant heads. "I think we'll be able to pull thedoor open," said Ron, peering over the dog's back. "Want to go first,Hermione?""No, I don't!""All right." Ron gritted his teeth and stepped carefully over the dog'slegs. He bent and pulled the ring of the trapdoor, which swung up andopen."What can you see?" Hermione said anxiously."Nothing -- just black -- there's no way of climbing down, we'll justhave to drop."Harry, who was still playing the flute, waved at Ron to get hisattention and pointed at himself."You want to go first? Are you sure?" said Ron. "I don't know how deepthis thing goes. Give the flute to Hermione so she can keep him asleep."Harry handed the flute over. In the few seconds' silence, the doggrowled and twitched, but the moment Hermione began to play, it fellback into its deep sleep.Harry climbed over it and looked down through the trapdoor. There was nosign of the bottom.He lowered himself through the hole until he was hanging on by hisfingertips. Then he looked up at Ron and said, "If anything happens tome, don't follow. Go straight to the owlery and send Hedwig toDumbledore, right?""Right," said Ron.




222"See you in a minute, I hope...And Harry let go. Cold, damp air rushed past him as he fell down, down,down and -- FLUMP. With a funny, muffled sort of thump he landed onsomething soft. He sat up and felt around, his eyes not used to thegloom. It felt as though he was sitting on some sort of plant."It's okay!" he called up to the light the size of a postage stamp,which was the open trapdoor, "it's a soft landing, you can jump!"Ron followed right away. He landed, sprawled next to Harry."What's this stuff?" were his first words."Dunno, some sort of plant thing. I suppose it's here to break the fall.Come on, Hermione!"The distant music stopped. There was a loud bark from the dog, butHermione had already jumped. She landed on Harry's other side."We must be miles under the school , she said."Lucky this plant thing's here, really," said Ron."Lucky!" shrieked Hermione. "Look at you both!"She leapt up and struggled toward a damp wall. She had to strugglebecause the moment she had landed, the plant had started to twistsnakelike tendrils around her ankles. As for Harry and Ron, their legshad already been bound tightly in long creepers without their noticing.Hermione had managed to free herself before the plant got a firm grip onher. Now she watched in horror as the two boys fought to pull the plantoff them, but the more they strained against it, the tighter and fasterthe plant wound around them."Stop moving!" Hermione ordered them. "I know what this is -- it'sDevil's Snare!""Oh, I'm so glad we know what it's called, that's a great help," snarledRon, leaning back, trying to stop the plant from curling around hisneck. "Shut up, I'm trying to remember how to kill it!" said Hermione.




223"Well, hurry up, I can't breathe!" Harry gasped, wrestling with it as itcurled around his chest."Devil's Snare, Devil's Snare... what did Professor Sprout say? -- itlikes the dark and the damp"So light a fire!" Harry choked."Yes -- of course -- but there's no wood!" Hermione cried, wringing herhands."HAVE YOU GONE MAD?" Ron bellowed. "ARE YOU A WITCH OR NOT?""Oh, right!" said Hermione, and she whipped out her wand, waved it,muttered something, and sent a jet of the same bluebell flames she hadused on Snape at the plant. In a matter of seconds, the two boys felt itloosening its grip as it cringed away from the light and warmth.Wriggling and flailing, it unraveled itself from their bodies, and theywere able to pull free."Lucky you pay attention in Herbology, Hermione," said Harry as hejoined her by the wall, wiping sweat off his face."Yeah," said Ron, "and lucky Harry doesn't lose his head in a crisis --'there's no wood,' honestly.""This way," said Harry, pointing down a stone passageway, which was theonly way forward.All they could hear apart from their footsteps was the gentle drip ofwater trickling down the walls. The passageway sloped downward, andHarry was reminded of Gringotts. With an unpleasant jolt of the heart,he remembered the dragons said to be guarding vaults in the wizards'bank. If they met a dragon, a fully-grown dragon -- Norbert had been badenough..."Can you hear something?" Ron whispered.Harry listened. A soft rustling and clinking seemed to be coming from upahead."Do you think it's a ghost?"




224"I don't know... sounds like wings to me.""There's light ahead -- I can see something moving."They reached the end of the passageway and saw before them a brilliantlylit chamber, its ceiling arching high above them. It was full of small,jewel-bright birds, fluttering and tumbling all around the room. On theopposite side of the chamber was a heavy wooden door."Do you think they'll attack us if we cross the room?" said Ron."Probably," said Harry. "They don't look very vicious, but I suppose ifthey all swooped down at once... well, there's no other choice... I'llrun."He took a deep breath, covered his face with his arms, and sprintedacross the room. He expected to feel sharp beaks and claws tearing athim any second, but nothing happened. He reached the door untouched. Hepulled the handle, but it was locked.The other two followed him. They tugged and heaved at the door, but itwouldn't budge, not even when Hermione tried her Alohomora charm."Now what?" said Ron."These birds... they can't be here just for decoration," said Hermione.They watched the birds soaring overhead, glittering -- glittering?"They're not birds!" Harry said suddenly. "They're keys! Winged keys --look carefully. So that must mean..." he looked around the chamber whilethe other two squinted up at the flock of keys. "... yes -- look!Broomsticks! We've got to catch the key to the door!""But there are hundreds of them!"Ron examined the lock on the door."We're looking for a big, old-fashioned one -- probably silver, like thehandle."They each seized a broomstick and kicked off into the air, soaring intothe midst of the cloud of keys. They grabbed and snatched, but the




225bewitched keys darted and dived so quickly it was almost impossible tocatch one.Not for nothing, though, was Harry the youngest Seeker in a century. Hehad a knack for spotting things other people didn't. After a minute'sweaving about through the whirl of rainbow feathers, he noticed a largesilver key that had a bent wing, as if it had already been caught andstuffed roughly into the keyhole."That one!" he called to the others. "That big one -- there -- no, there-- with bright blue wings -- the feathers are all crumpled on one side."Ron went speeding in the direction that Harry was pointing, crashed intothe ceiling, and nearly fell off his broom."We've got to close in on it!" Harry called, not taking his eyes off thekey with the damaged wing. "Ron, you come at it from above -- Hermione,stay below and stop it from going down and I'll try and catch it. Right,NOW!"Ron dived, Hermione rocketed upward, the key dodged them both, and Harrystreaked after it; it sped toward the wall, Harry leaned forward andwith a nasty, crunching noise, pinned it against the stone with onehand. Ron and Hermione's cheers echoed around the high chamber.They landed quickly, and Harry ran to the door, the key struggling inhis hand. He rammed it into the lock and turned -- it worked. The momentthe lock had clicked open, the key took flight again, looking verybattered now that it had been caught twice."Ready?" Harry asked the other two, his hand on the door handle. Theynodded. He pulled the door open.The next chamber was so dark they couldn't see anything at all. But asthey stepped into it, light suddenly flooded the room to reveal anastonishing sight.They were standing on the edge of a huge chessboard, behind the blackchessmen, which were all taller than they were and carved from whatlooked like black stone. Facing them, way across the chamber, were thewhite pieces. Harry, Ron and Hermione shivered slightly -- the toweringwhite chessmen had no faces.




226"Now what do we do?" Harry whispered."It's obvious, isn't it?" said Ron. "We've got to play our way acrossthe room."Behind the white pieces they could see another door."How?" said Hermione nervously."I think," said Ron, "we're going to have to be chessmen."He walked up to a black knight and put his hand out to touch theknight's horse. At once, the stone sprang to life. The horse pawed theground and the knight turned his helmeted head to look down at Ron."Do we -- er -- have to join you to get across?" The black knightnodded. Ron turned to the other two."This needs thinking about he said. I suppose we've got to take theplace of three of the black pieces...."Harry and Hermione stayed quiet, watching Ron think. Finally he said,"Now, don't be offended or anything, but neither of you are that good atchess --""We're not offended," said Harry quickly. "Just tell us what to do.""Well, Harry, you take the place of that bishop, and Hermione, YOU 90next to him instead of that castle.""What about you?""I'm going to be a knight," said Ron.The chessmen seemed to have been listening, because at these words aknight, a bishop, and a castle turned their backs on the white piecesand walked off the board, leaving three empty squares that Harry, Ron,and Hermione took."White always plays first in chess," said Ron, peering across the board."Yes... look..."A white pawn had moved forward two squares.




227Ron started to direct the black pieces. They moved silently wherever hesent them. Harry's knees were trembling. What if they lost?"Harry -- move diagonally four squares to the right."Their first real shock came when their other knight was taken. The whitequeen smashed him to the floor and dragged him off the board, where helay quite still, facedown."Had to let that happen," said Ron, looking shaken. "Leaves you free totake that bishop, Hermione, go on."Every time one of their men was lost, the white pieces showed no mercy.Soon there was a huddle of limp black players slumped along the wall.Twice, Ron only just noticed in time that Harry and Hermione were indanger. He himself darted around the board, taking almost as many whitepieces as they had lost black ones."We're nearly there," he muttered suddenly. "Let me think let methink..."The white queen turned her blank face toward him."Yes..." said Ron softly, "It's the only way... I've got to be taken.""NOF Harry and Hermione shouted."That's chess!" snapped Ron. "You've got to make some sacrifices! I takeone step forward and she'll take me -- that leaves you free to checkmatethe king, Harry!""But --""Do you want to stop Snape or not?""Ron --""Look, if you don't hurry up, he'll already have the Stone!"There was no alternative."Ready?" Ron called, his face pale but determined. "Here I go - now,




228don't hang around once you've won."He stepped forward, and the white queen pounced. She struck Ron hardacross the head with her stone arm, and he crashed to the floor -Hermione screamed but stayed on her square - the white queen dragged Ronto one side. He looked as if he'd been knocked out.Shaking, Harry moved three spaces to the left.The white king took off his crown and threw it at Harry's feet. They hadwon. The chessmen parted and bowed, leaving the door ahead clear. Withone last desperate look back at Ron, Harry and Hermione charged throughthe door and up the next passageway."What if he's --?""He'll be all right," said Harry, trying to convince himself. "What doyou reckon's next?""We've had Sprout's, that was the Devil's Snare; Flitwick must've putcharms on the keys; McGonagall transfigured the chessmen to make themalive; that leaves Quirrell's spell, and Snape's."They had reached another door."All right?" Harry whispered."Go on."Harry pushed it open.A disgusting smell filled their nostrils, making both of them pull theirrobes up over their noses. Eyes watering, they saw, flat on the floor infront of them, a troll even larger than the one they had tackled, outcold with a bloody lump on its head."I'm glad we didn't have to fight that one," Harry whispered as theystepped carefully over one of its massive legs. "Come on, I can'tbreathe."He pulled open the next door, both of them hardly daring to look at whatcame next - but there was nothing very frightening in here, just a tablewith seven differently shaped bottles standing on it in a line.




229"Snape's," said Harry. "What do we have to do?"They stepped over the threshold, and immediately a fire sprang up behindthem in the doorway. It wasn't ordinary fire either; it was purple. Atthe same instant, black flames shot up in the doorway leading onward.They were trapped."Look!" Hermione seized a roll of paper lying next to the bottles. Harrylooked over her shoulder to read it:Danger lies before you, while safety lies behind,Two of us will help you, which ever you would find,One among us seven will let you move ahead,Another will transport the drinker back instead,Two among our number hold only nettle wine,Three of us are killers, waiting bidden in line.Choose, unless you wish to stay here forevermore,To help you in your choice, we give you these clues four:First, however slyly the poison tries to hideYou will always find some on nettle wine's left side;Second, different are those who stand at either end,But if you would move onward, neither is your friend;Third, as you see clearly, all are different size,Neither dwarf nor giant holds death in their insides;Fourth, the second left and the second on the rightAre twins once you taste them, though different at first sight.




230Hermione let out a great sigh and Harry, amazed, saw that she wassmiling, the very last thing he felt like doing."Brilliant," said Hermione. "This isn't magic -- it's logic -- a puzzle.A lot of the greatest wizards haven't got an ounce of logic, they'd bestuck in here forever.""But so will we, won't we?" "Of course not," said Hermione. "Everythingwe need is here on this paper. Seven bottles: three are poison; two arewine; one will get us safely through the black fire, and one will get usback through the purple.""But how do we know which to drink?""Give me a minute."Hermione read the paper several times. Then she walked up and down theline of bottles, muttering to herself and pointing at them. At last, sheclapped her hands."Got it," she said. "The smallest bottle will get us through the blackfire -- toward the Stone."Harry looked at the tiny bottle."There's only enough there for one of us," he said. "That's hardly oneswallow."They looked at each other."Which one will get you back through the purple flames?"Hermione pointed at a rounded bottle at the right end of the line."You drink that," said Harry. "No, listen, get back and get Ron. Grabbrooms from the flying- key room, they'll get you out of the trapdoorand past Fluffy -- go straight to the owlery and send Hedwig toDumbledore, we need him. I might be able to hold Snape off for a while,but I'm no match for him, really.""But Harry -- what if You-Know-Who's with him?""Well -- I was lucky once, wasn't I?" said Harry, pointing at his scar.




231"I might get lucky again."Hermione's lip trembled, and she suddenly dashed at Harry and threw herarms around him."Hermione!""Harry -- you're a great wizard, you know.""I'm not as good as you," said Harry, very embarrassed, as she let go ofhim."Me!" said Hermione. "Books! And cleverness! There are more importantthings -- friendship and bravery and -- oh Harry -- be careful!""You drink first," said Harry. "You are sure which is which, aren'tyou?""Positive," said Hermione. She took a long drink from the round bottleat the end, and shuddered."It's not poison?" said Harry anxiously."No -- but it's like ice.""Quick, go, before it wears off.""Good luck -- take care.""GO!"Hermione turned and walked straight through the purple fire.Harry took a deep breath and picked up the smallest bottle. He turned toface the black flames."Here I come," he said, and he drained the little bottle in one gulp.It was indeed as though ice was flooding his body. He put the bottledown and walked forward; he braced himself, saw the black flames lickinghis body, but couldn't feel them -- for a moment he could see nothingbut dark fire -- then he was on the other side, in the last chamber.




232There was already someone there -- but it wasn't Snape. It wasn't evenVoldemort.CHAPTER SEVENTEENTHE MAN WITH TWO FACESIt was Quirrell."You!" gasped Harry.Quirrell smiled. His face wasn't twitching at all."Me," he said calmly. "I wondered whether I'd be meeting you here,Potter.""But I thought -- Snape --""Severus?" Quirrell laughed, and it wasn't his usual quivering treble,either, but cold and sharp. "Yes, Severus does seem the type, doesn'the? So useful to have him swooping around like an overgrown bat. Next tohim, who would suspect p-p-poor, st-stuttering P-Professor Quirrell?"Harry couldn't take it in. This couldn't be true, it couldn't."But Snape tried to kill me!""No, no, no. I tried to kill you. Your friend Miss Granger accidentallyknocked me over as she rushed to set fire to Snape at that Quidditchmatch. She broke my eye contact with you. Another few seconds and I'dhave got you off that broom. I'd have managed it before then if Snapehadn't been muttering a countercurse, trying to save you.""Snape was trying to save me?""Of course," said Quirrell coolly. "\Why do you think he wanted toreferee your next match? He was trying to make sure I didn't do itagain. Funny, really... he needn't have bothered. I couldn't do anythingwith Dumbledore watching. All the other teachers thought Snape wastrying to stop Gryffindor from winning, he did make himself unpopular...and what a waste of time, when after all that, I'm going to kill youtonight."




233Quirrell snapped his fingers. Ropes sprang out of thin air and wrappedthemselves tightly around Harry."You're too nosy to live, Potter. Scurrying around the school onHalloween like that, for all I knew you'd seen me coming to look at whatwas guarding the Stone.""You let the troll in?""Certainly. I have a special gift with trolls -- you must have seen whatI did to the one in the chamber back there? Unfortunately, whileeveryone else was running around looking for it, Snape, who alreadysuspected me, went straight to the third floor to head me off -- and notonly did my troll fail to beat you to death, that three-headed dogdidn't even manage to bite Snape's leg off properly."Now, wait quietly, Potter. I need to examine this interesting mirror.It was only then that Harry realized what was standing behind Quirrell.It was the Mirror of Erised."This mirror is the key to finding the Stone," Quirrell murmured,tapping his way around the frame. "Trust Dumbledore to come up withsomething like this... but he's in London... I'll be far away by thetime he gets back...."All Harry could think of doing was to keep Quirrell talking and stop himfrom concentrating on the mirror."I saw you and Snape in the forest --" he blurted out."Yes," said Quirrell idly, walking around the mirror to look at theback. "He was on to me by that time, trying to find out how far I'd got.He suspected me all along. Tried to frighten me - as though he could,when I had Lord Voldemort on my side...."Quirrell came back out from behind the mirror and stared hungrily intoit."I see the Stone... I'm presenting it to my master... but where is it?"Harry struggled against the ropes binding him, but they didn't give. He




234had to keep Quirrell from giving his whole attention to the mirror."But Snape always seemed to hate me so much.""Oh, he does," said Quirrell casually, "heavens, yes. He was at Hogwartswith your father, didn't you know? They loathed each other. But he neverwanted you dead.""But I heard you a few days ago, sobbing -- I thought Snape wasthreatening you...."For the first time, a spasm of fear flitted across Quirrell's face."Sometimes," he said, "I find it hard to follow my master's instructions-- he is a great wizard and I am weak --""You mean he was there in the classroom with you?" Harry gasped."He is with me wherever I go," said Quirrell quietly. "I met him when Itraveled around the world. A foolish young man I was then, full ofridiculous ideas about good and evil. Lord Voldemort showed me how wrongI was. There is no good and evil, there is only power, and those tooweak to seek it.... Since then, I have served him faithfully, although Ihave let him down many times. He has had to be very hard on me."Quirrell shivered suddenly. "He does not forgive mistakes easily. When Ifailed to steal the stone from Gringotts, he was most displeased. Hepunished me... decided he would have to keep a closer watch on me...."Quirrell's voice trailed away. Harry was remembering his trip to DiagonAlley -how could he have been so stupid? He'd seen Quirrell there thatvery day, shaken hands with him in the Leaky Cauldron.Quirrell cursed under his breath."I don't understand... is the Stone inside the mirror? Should I breakit?"Harry's mind was racing.What I want more than anything else in the world at the moment, hethought, is to find the Stone before Quirrell does. So if I look in themirror, I should see myseff finding it -- which means I'll see whereit's hidden! But how can I look without Quirrell realizing what I'm up




235to?He tried to edge to the left, to get in front of the glass withoutQuirrell noticing, but the ropes around his ankles were too tight: hetripped and fell over. Quirrell ignored him. He was still talking tohimself. "What does this mirror do? How does it work? Help me, Master!"And to Harry's horror, a voice answered, and the voice seemed to comefrom Quirrell himself"Use the boy... Use the boy..."Quirrell rounded on Harry."Yes -- Potter -- come here."He clapped his hands once, and the ropes binding Harry fell off. Harrygot slowly to his feet."Come here," Quirrell repeated. "Look in the mirror and tell me what yousee."Harry walked toward him.I must lie, he thought desperately. I must look and lie about what Isee, that's all.Quirrell moved close behind him. Harry breathed in the funny smell thatseemed to come from Quirrell's turban. He closed his eyes, stepped infront of the mirror, and opened them again.He saw his reflection, pale and scared-looking at first. But a momentlater, the reflection smiled at him. It put its hand into its pocket andpulled out a blood-red stone. It winked and put the Stone back in itspocket -- and as it did so, Harry felt something heavy drop into hisreal pocket. Somehow -- incredibly -- he'd gotten the Stone."Well?" said Quirrell impatiently. "What do you see?"Harry screwed up his courage."I see myself shaking hands with Dumbledore," he invented. "I -- I'vewon the house cup for Gryffindor."




236Quirrell cursed again."Get out of the way," he said. As Harry moved aside, he felt theSorcerer's Stone against his leg. Dare he make a break for it?But he hadn't walked five paces before a high voice spoke, thoughQuirrell wasn't moving his lips."He lies... He lies...""Potter, come back here!" Quirrell shouted. "Tell me the truth! What didyou just see?"The high voice spoke again."Let me speak to him... face-to-face...""Master, you are not strong enough!""I have strength enough... for this...."Harry felt as if Devil's Snare was rooting him to the spot. He couldn'tmove a muscle. Petrified, he watched as Quirrell reached up and began tounwrap his turban. What was going on? The turban fell away. Quirrell'shead looked strangely small without it. Then he turned slowly on thespot.Harry would have screamed, but he couldn't make a sound. Where thereshould have been a back to Quirrell's head, there was a face, the mostterrible face Harry had ever seen. It was chalk white with glaring redeyes and slits for nostrils, like a snake."Harry Potter..." it whispered.Harry tried to take a step backward but his legs wouldn't move."See what I have become?" the face said. "Mere shadow and vapor ... Ihave form only when I can share another's body... but there have alwaysbeen those willing to let me into their hearts and minds.... Unicornblood has strengthened me, these past weeks... you saw faithful Quirrelldrinking it for me in the forest... and once I have the Elixir of Life,I will be able to create a body of my own.... Now... why don't you give




237me that Stone in your pocket?"So he knew. The feeling suddenly surged back into Harry's legs. Hestumbled backward."Don't be a fool," snarled the face. "Better save your own life and joinme... or you'll meet the same end as your parents.... They died beggingme for mercy...""LIAR!" Harry shouted suddenly.Quirrell was walking backward at him, so that Voldemort could still seehim. The evil face was now smiling."How touching..." it hissed. "I always value bravery... Yes, boy, yourparents were brave.... I killed your father first; and he put up acourageous fight... but your mother needn't have died... she was tryingto protect you.... Now give me the Stone, unless you want her to havedied in vain.""NEVER!"Harry sprang toward the flame door, but Voldemort screamed "SEIZE HIM!"and the next second, Harry felt Quirrell's hand close on his wrist. Atonce, a needle-sharp pain seared across Harry's scar; his head felt asthough it was about to split in two; he yelled, struggling with all hismight, and to his surprise, Quirrell let go of him. The pain in his headlessened -- he looked around wildly to see where Quirrell had gone, andsaw him hunched in pain, looking at his fingers -- they were blisteringbefore his eyes."Seize him! SEIZE HIM!" shrieked Voldemort again, and Quirrell lunged,knocking Harry clean off his feet' landing on top of him, both handsaround Harry's neck -- Harry's scar was almost blinding him with pain,yet he could see Quirrell howling in agony."Master, I cannot hold him -- my hands -- my hands!"And Quirrell, though pinning Harry to the ground with his knees, let goof his neck and stared, bewildered, at his own palms -- Harry could seethey looked burned, raw, red, and shiny."Then kill him, fool, and be done!" screeched Voldemort.




238Quirrell raised his hand to perform a deadly curse, but Harry, byinstinct, reached up and grabbed Quirrell's face --"AAAARGH!"Quirrell rolled off him, his face blistering, too, and then Harry knew:Quirrell couldn't touch his bare skin, not without suffering terriblepain -- his only chance was to keep hold of Quirrell, keep him in enoughpain to stop him from doing a curse.Harry jumped to his feet, caught Quirrell by the arm, and hung on astight as he could. Quirrell screamed and tried to throw Harry off -- thepain in Harry's head was building -- he couldn't see -- he could onlyhear Quirrell's terrible shrieks and Voldemort's yells of, "KILL HIM!KILL HIM!" and other voices, maybe in Harry's own head, crying, "Harry!Harry!"He felt Quirrell's arm wrenched from his grasp, knew all was lost, andfell into blackness, down ... down... down...Something gold was glinting just above him. The Snitch! He tried tocatch it, but his arms were too heavy.He blinked. It wasn't the Snitch at all. It was a pair of glasses. Howstrange.He blinked again. The smiling face of Albus Dumbledore swam into viewabove him."Good afternoon, Harry," said Dumbledore. Harry stared at him. Then heremembered: "Sir! The Stone! It was Quirrell! He's got the Stone! Sir,quick --""Calm yourself, dear boy, you are a little behind the times," saidDumbledore. "Quirrell does not have the Stone.""Then who does? Sir, I --""Harry, please relax, or Madam Pomfrey will have me thrown out.Harry swallowed and looked around him. He realized he must be in thehospital wing. He was lying in a bed with white linen sheets, and next




239to him was a table piled high with what looked like half the candy shop."Tokens from your friends and admirers," said Dumbledore, beaming. "Whathappened down in the dungeons between you and Professor Quirrell is acomplete secret, so, naturally, the whole school knows. I believe yourfriends Misters Fred and George Weasley were responsible for trying tosend you a toilet seat. No doubt they thought it would amuse you. MadamPomfrey, however, felt it might not be very hygienic, and confiscatedit.""How long have I been in here?""Three days. Mr. Ronald Weasley and Miss Granger will be most relievedyou have come round, they have been extremely worried.""But sit, the StoneI see you are not to be distracted. Very well, the Stone. ProfessorQuirrell did not manage to take it from you. I arrived in time toprevent that, although you were doing very well on your own, I must say."You got there? You got Hermione's owl?""We must have crossed in midair. No sooner had I reached London than itbecame clear to me that the place I should be was the one I had justleft. I arrived just in time to pull Quirrell off you.""It was you.""I feared I might be too late.""You nearly were, I couldn't have kept him off the Stone much longer --""Not the Stone, boy, you -- the effort involved nearly killed you. Forone terrible moment there, I was afraid it had. As for the Stone, it hasbeen destroyed.""Destroyed?" said Harry blankly. "But your friend -- Nicolas Flamel --""Oh, you know about Nicolas?" said Dumbledore, sounding quite delighted."You did do the thing properly, didn't you? Well, Nicolas and I have hada little chat, and agreed it's all for the best."




240"But that means he and his wife will die, won't they?""They have enough Elixir stored to set their affairs in order and then,yes, they will die."Dumbledore smiled at the look of amazement on Harry's face."To one as young as you, I'm sure it seems incredible, but to Nicolasand Perenelle, it really is like going to bed after a very, very longday. After all, to the well-organized mind, death is but the next greatadventure. You know, the Stone was really not such a wonderful thing. Asmuch money and life as you could want! The two things most human beingswould choose above all -- the trouble is, humans do have a knack ofchoosing precisely those things that are worst for them." Harry laythere, lost for words. Dumbledore hummed a little and smiled at theceiling."Sir?" said Harry. "I've been thinking... sir -- even if the Stone'sgone, Vol-, I mean, You-Know- Who --""Call him Voldemort, Harry. Always use the proper name for things. Fearof a name increases fear of the thing itself.""Yes, sir. Well, Voldemort's going to try other ways of coming back,isn't he? I mean, he hasn't gone, has he?""No, Harry, he has not. He is still out there somewhere, perhaps lookingfor another body to share... not being truly alive, he cannot be killed.He left Quirrell to die; he shows just as little mercy to his followersas his enemies. Nevertheless, Harry, while you may only have delayed hisreturn to power, it will merely take someone else who is prepared tofight what seems a losing battle next time -- and if he is delayedagain, and again, why, he may never return to power."Harry nodded, but stopped quickly, because it made his head hurt. Thenhe said, "Sir, there are some other things I'd like to know, if you cantell me... things I want to know the truth about....""The truth." Dumbledore sighed. "It is a beautiful and terrible thing,and should therefore be treated with great caution. However, I shallanswer your questions unless I have a very good reason not to, in whichcase I beg you'll forgive me. I shall not, of course, lie."




241"Well... Voldemort said that he only killed my mother because she triedto stop him from killing me. But why would he want to kill me in thefirst place?"Dumbledore sighed very deeply this time."Alas, the first thing you ask me, I cannot tell you. Not today. Notnow. You will know, one day... put it from your mind for now, Harry.When you are older... I know you hate to hear this... when you areready, you will know."And Harry knew it would be no good to argue."But why couldn't Quirrell touch me?""Your mother died to save you. If there is one thing Voldemort cannotunderstand, it is love. He didn't realize that love as powerful as yourmother's for you leaves its own mark. Not a scar, no visible sign... tohave been loved so deeply, even though the person who loved us is gone,will give us some protection forever. It is in your very skin. Quirrell,full of hatred, greed, and ambition, sharing his soul with Voldemort,could not touch you for this reason. It was agony to touch a personmarked by something so good."Dumbledore now became very interested in a bird out on the windowsill,which gave Harry time to dry his eyes on the sheet. When he had foundhis voice again, Harry said, "And the invisibility cloak - do you knowwho sent it to me?""Ah - your father happened to leave it in my possession, and I thoughtyou might like it." Dumbledore's eyes twinkled. "Useful things... yourfather used it mainly for sneaking off to the kitchens to steal foodwhen he was here.""And there's something else...""Fire away.""Quirrell said Snape --""Professor Snape, Harry." "Yes, him -- Quirrell said he hates me becausehe hated my father. Is that true?"




242"Well, they did rather detest each other. Not unlike yourself and Mr.Malfoy. And then, your father did something Snape could never forgive.""What?""He saved his life.""What?""Yes..." said Dumbledore dreamily. "Funny, the way people's minds work,isn't it? Professor Snape couldn't bear being in your father's debt....I do believe he worked so hard to protect you this year because he feltthat would make him and your father even. Then he could go back tohating your father's memory in peace...."Harry tried to understand this but it made his head pound, so hestopped."And sir, there's one more thing...""Just the one?""How did I get the Stone out of the mirror?""Ah, now, I'm glad you asked me that. It was one of my more brilliantideas, and between you and me, that's saying something. You see, onlyone who wanted to find the Stone -- find it, but not use it -- would beable to get it, otherwise they'd just see themselves making gold ordrinking Elixir of Life. My brain surprises even me sometimes.... Now,enough questions. I suggest you make a start on these sweets. Ah! BettieBott's Every Flavor Beans! I was unfortunate enough in my youth to comeacross a vomitflavored one, and since then I'm afraid I've rather lostmy liking for them -- but I think I'll be safe with a nice toffee, don'tyou?"He smiled and popped the golden-brown bean into his mouth. Then hechoked and said, "Alas! Ear wax!"Madam Pomfrey, the nurse, was a nice woman, but very strict."Just five minutes," Harry pleaded."Absolutely not."




243"You let Professor Dumbledore in...""Well, of course, that was the headmaster, quite different. You needrest.""I am resting, look, lying down and everything. Oh, go on, MadamPomfrey...""Oh, very well," she said. "But five minutes only."And she let Ron and Hermione in."Harry!"Hermione looked ready to fling her arms around him again, but Harry wasglad she held herself in as his head was still very sore."Oh, Harry, we were sure you were going to -- Dumbledore was so worried--""The whole school's talking about it," said Ron. "What really happened?"It was one of those rare occasions when the true story is even morestrange and exciting than the wild rumors. Harry told them everything:Quirrell; the mirror; the Stone; and Voldemort. Ron and Hermione were avery good audience; they gasped in all the right places, and when Harrytold them what was under Quirrell's turban, Hermione screamed out loud."So the Stone's gone?" said Ron finally. "Flamel's just going to die?""That's what I said, but Dumbledore thinks that -- what was it? -- 'tothe well-organized mind, death is but the next great adventure."I always said he was off his rocker," said Ron, looking quite impressedat how crazy his hero was."So what happened to you two?" said Harry."Well, I got back all right," said Hermione. "I brought Ron round --that took a while -- and we were dashing up to the owlery to contactDumbledore when we met him in the entrance hall -- he already knew -- hejust said, 'Harry's gone after him, hasn't he?' and hurtled off to the




244third floor.""D'you think he meant you to do it?" said Ron. "Sending you yourfather's cloak and everything?""Well, " Hermione exploded, "if he did -- I mean to say that's terrible-- you could have been killed.""No, it isn't," said Harry thoughtfully. "He's a funny man, Dumbledore.I think he sort of wanted to give me a chance. I think he knows more orless everything that goes on here, you know. I reckon he had a prettygood idea we were going to try, and instead of stopping us, he justtaught us enough to help. I don't think it was an accident he let mefind out how the mirror worked. It's almost like he thought I had theright to face Voldemort if I could....""Yeah, Dumbledore's off his rocker, all right," said Ron proudly."Listen, you've got to be up for the end-of-year feast tomorrow. Thepoints are all in and Slytherin won, of course -- you missed the lastQuidditch match, we were steamrollered by Ravenclaw without you -- butthe food'll be good."At that moment, Madam Pomfrey bustled over."You've had nearly fifteen minutes, now OUT" she said firmly.After a good night's sleep, Harry felt nearly back to normal.I want to go to the feast," he told Madam Pomfrey as she straightenedhis many candy boxes. I can, can't I?""Professor Dumbledore says you are to be allowed to go," she saidstiffily, as though in her opinion Professor Dumbledore didn't realizehow risky feasts could be. "And you have another visitor.""Oh, good," said Harry. "Who is it?"Hagrid sidled through the door as he spoke. As usual when he wasindoors, Hagrid looked too big to be allowed. He sat down next to Harry,took one look at him, and burst into tears."It's -- all -- my -- ruddy -- fault!" he sobbed, his face in his hands.I told the evil git how ter get past Fluffy! I told him! It was the only




245thing he didn't know, an' I told him! Yeh could've died! All fer adragon egg! I'll never drink again! I should be chucked out an' made terlive as a Muggle!""Hagrid!" said Harry, shocked to see Hagrid shaking with grief andremorse, great tears leaking down into his beard. "Hagrid, he'd havefound out somehow, this is Voldemort we're talking about, he'd havefound out even if you hadn't told him.""Yeh could've died!" sobbed Hagrid. "An' don' say the name!""VOLDEMORT!" Harry bellowed, and Hagrid was so shocked, he stoppedcrying. "I've met him and I'm calling him by his name. Please cheer up,Hagrid, we saved the Stone, it's gone, he can't use it. Have a ChocolateFrog, I've got loads...."Hagrid wiped his nose on the back of his hand and said, "That remindsme. I've got yeh a present.""It's not a stoat sandwich, is it?" said Harry anxiously, and at lastHagrid gave a weak chuckle. "Nah. Dumbledore gave me the day offyesterday ter fix it. 'Course, he shoulda sacked me instead -- anyway,got yeh this..."It seemed to be a handsome, leather-covered book. Harry opened itcuriously. It was full of wizard photographs. Smiling and waving at himfrom every page were his mother and father."Sent owls off ter all yer parents' old school friends, askin' ferphotos... knew yeh didn' have any... d'yeh like it?"Harry couldn't speak, but Hagrid understood.Harry made his way down to the end-of-year feast alone that night. Hehad been held up by Madam Pomfrey's fussing about, insisting on givinghim one last checkup, so the Great Hall was already full. It was deckedout in the Slytherin colors of green and silver to celebrate Slytherin'swinning the house cup for the seventh year in a row. A huge bannershowing the Slytherin serpent covered the wall behind the High Table.When Harry walked in there was a sudden hush, and then everybody startedtalking loudly at once. He slipped into a seat between Ron and Hermioneat the Gryffindor table and tried to ignore the fact that people were




246standing up to look at him.Fortunately, Dumbledore arrived moments later. The babble died away."Another year gone!" Dumbledore said cheerfully. "And I must trouble youwith an old man's wheezing waffle before we sink our teeth into ourdelicious feast. What a year it has been! Hopefully your heads are all alittle fuller than they were... you have the whole summer ahead to getthem nice and empty before next year starts...."Now, as I understand it, the house cup here needs awarding, and thepoints stand thus: In fourth place, Gryffindor, with three hundred andtwelve points; in third, Hufflepuff, with three hundred and fifty-two;Ravenclaw has four hundred and twenty-six and Slytherin, four hundredand seventy- two."A storm of cheering and stamping broke out from the Slytherin table.Harry could see Draco Malfoy banging his goblet on the table. It was asickening sight."Yes, Yes, well done, Slytherin," said Dumbledore. "However, recentevents must be taken into account."The room went very still. The Slytherins' smiles faded a little."Ahem," said Dumbledore. "I have a few last-minute points to dish out.Let me see. Yes..."First -- to Mr. Ronald Weasley..."Ron went purple in the face; he looked like a radish with a bad sunburn."...for the best-played game of chess Hogwarts has seen in many years, Iaward Gryffindor house fifty points."Gryffindor cheers nearly raised the bewitched ceiling; the starsoverhead seemed to quiver. Percy could be heard telling the otherprefects, "My brother, you know! My youngest brother! Got pastMcGonagall's giant chess set!"At last there was silence again."Second -- to Miss Hermione Granger... for the use of cool logic in the




247face of fire, I award Gryffindor house fifty points."Hermione buried her face in her arms; Harry strongly suspected she hadburst into tears. Gryffindors up and down the table were besidethemselves -- they were a hundred points up. "Third -- to Mr. HarryPotter..." said Dumbledore. The room went deadly quiet for pure nerveand outstanding courage, I award Gryffindor house sixty points."The din was deafening. Those who could add up while yelling themselveshoarse knew that Gryffindor now had four hundred and seventy-two points-- exactly the same as Slytherin. They had tied for the house cup -- ifonly Dumbledore had given Harry just one more point.Dumbledore raised his hand. The room gradually fell silent."There are all kinds of courage," said Dumbledore, smiling. "It takes agreat deal of bravery to stand up to our enemies, but just as much tostand up to our friends. I therefore award ten points to Mr. NevilleLongbottom."Someone standing outside the Great Hall might well have thought somesort of explosion had taken place, so loud was the noise that eruptedfrom the Gryffindor table. Harry, Ron, and Hermione stood up to yell andcheer as Neville, white with shock, disappeared under a pile of peoplehugging him. He had never won so much as a point for Gryffindor before.Harry, still cheering, nudged Ron in the ribs and pointed at Malfoy, whocouldn't have looked more stunned and horrified if he'd just had theBody-Bind Curse put on him."Which means, Dumbledore called over the storm of applause, for evenRavenclaw and Hufflepuff were celebrating the downfall of Slytherin, "weneed a little change of decoration."He clapped his hands. In an instant, the green hangings became scarletand the silver became gold; the huge Slytherin serpent vanished and atowering Gryffindor lion took its place. Snape was shaking ProfessorMcGonagall's hand, with a horrible, forced smile. He caught Harry's eyeand Harry knew at once that Snape's feelings toward him hadn't changedone jot. This didn't worry Harry. It seemed as though life would be backto normal next year, or as normal as it ever was at Hogwarts.It was the best evening of Harry's life, better than winning atQuidditch, or Christmas, or knocking out mountain trolls... he would




248never, ever forget tonight.Harry had almost forgotten that the exam results were still to come, butcome they did. To their great surprise, both he and Ron passed with goodmarks; Hermione, of course, had the best grades of the first years. EvenNeville scraped through, his good Herbology mark making up for hisabysmal Potions one. They had hoped that Goyle, who was almost as stupidas he was mean, might be thrown out, but he had passed, too. It was ashame, but as Ron said, you couldn't have everything in life.And suddenly, their wardrobes were empty, their trunks were packed,Neville's toad was found lurking in a corner of the toilets; notes werehanded out to all students, warning them not to use magic over theholidays ("I always hope they'll forget to give us these," said FredWeasley sadly); Hagrid was there to take them down to the fleet of boatsthat sailed across the lake; they were boarding the Hogwarts Express;talking and laughing as the countryside became greener and tidier;eating Bettie Bott's Every Flavor Beans as they sped past Muggle towns;pulling off their wizard robes and putting on jackets and coats; pullinginto platform nine and three-quarters at King's Cross Station.It took quite a while for them all to get off the platform. A wizenedold guard was up by the ticket barrier, letting them go through the gatein twos and threes so they didn't attract attention by all bursting outof a solid wall at once and alarming the Muggles."You must come and stay this summer," said Ron, "both of you -- I'llsend you an owl.""Thanks," said Harry, "I'll need something to look forward to." Peoplejostled them as they moved forward toward the gateway back to the Muggleworld. Some of them called:"Bye, Harry!""See you, Potter!""Still famous," said Ron, grinning at him."Not where I'm going, I promise you," said Harry.He, Ron, and Hermione passed through the gateway together. "There he is,Mom, there he is, look!"




249It was Ginny Weasley, Ron's younger sister, but she wasn't pointing atRon."Harry Potter!" she squealed. "Look, Mom! I can see"Be quiet, Ginny, and it's rude to point."Mrs. Weasley smiled down at them."Busy year?" she said."Very," said Harry. "Thanks for the fudge and the sweater, Mrs.Weasley.""Oh, it was nothing, dear.""Ready, are you?"It was Uncle Vernon, still purple-faced, still mustached, still lookingfurious at the nerve of Harry, carrying an owl in a cage in a stationfull of ordinary people. Behind him stood Aunt Petunia and Dudley,looking terrified at the very sight of Harry."You must be Harry's family!" said Mrs. Weasley."In a manner of speaking," said Uncle Vernon. "Hurry up, boy, we haven'tgot all day." He walked away.Harry hung back for a last word with Ron and Hermione."See you over the summer, then.""Hope you have -- er -- a good holiday," said Hermione, lookinguncertainly after Uncle Vernon, shocked that anyone could be sounpleasant."Oh, I will," said Harry, and they were surprised at the grin that wasspreading over his face. "They don't know we're not allowed to use magicat home. I'm going to have a lot of fun with Dudley this summer...."THE END




