Fabian Delph to Manchester City: Aston Villa captain performs incredible U-turn as £8m transfer is confirmed
Fabian Delph has performed a remarkable U-turn by leaving Aston Villa to sign a five-year deal with Manchester City.
The England midfielder completed a medical at City on Friday and is set to fly to Australia to join his new team-mates on their pre-season tour. The 25-year-old had rejected City's advances just last weekend when he issued a statement insisting: "I'm not leaving. I'm staying at the football club and I can't wait for the start of the season and captaining this great football club." 
The Aston Villa captain was not offered an improved deal by City to the one that he walked away from on Saturday, according to sources, and has signed the same contract worth around £100,000 a week. 
City have paid his £8m release fee which the club regard as good business for an England regular of his age.
City boss Manuel Pellegrini was delighted with the signing, telling City's official website: "Fabian Delph is an excellent player and I am looking forward to working with him.
"He has made a huge impact in recent seasons at Aston Villa and is now one of the brightest young midfielders in the Premier League.
"Fabian has tremendous skill and energy, and the fact that he has become a regular member of the England squad is further evidence of his progress over the past few seasons. At just 25 years old, he still has his best years ahead of him."
There was no clear indication as to why Delph had changed his mind again over joining City with whom he had a medical in Manchester. 
Having initially agreed to join City last week and then chosen to stay at Villa, the player is understood to have reflected on his decision and, having settled other issues in his life, resolved that he would like to take the opportunity offered.
Unfortunately for Delph, the emphatic nature of Saturday’s statement in which he pledged his future to Villa gave him very little room to manoeuvre.
The impending departure of Christian Benteke to Liverpool may also have played a part. Delph signed a new contract at the club in January, just five months before becoming a free agent. He subsequently described that decision as a “no-brainer” although he did not mention the £8m release fee at the same time.
For City it will be another homegrown player to add to the newly-acquired Raheem Sterling. They remain interested in the former Chelsea midfielder Kevin de Bruyne, currently at Wolfsburg, with Edin Dzeko and Stevan Jovetic among those who are likely to be sold this summer.

