Aston Villa lead race for Tottenham misfit Adebayor.

The Spurs striker still wants a pay-off to leave north London and has rejected offers from abroad, but is keen to re-unite with Tim Sherwood at Villa Park.

Aston Villa are in pole position to sign Emmanuel Adebayor from Tottenham this summer as a host of clubs chase the striker.

Tottenham are desperate to offload Adebayor and are willing to pay a portion of his £100,000-a-week (€140,000) wages to facilitate his move away from White Hart Lane.

Adebayor expects to leave this summer but is prepared to run the transfer saga into August in the hope of striking the best possible financial deal, in a similar manner to the severance package he received from Manchester City when he joined Tottenham permanently in 2012.

Spurs want £5 million (€7m) for Adebayor but are likely to accept a lower transfer fee to get the 31-year-old off their books after he was frozen out last season under Mauricio Pochettino.

The former Arsenal man has turned down a string of offers from the Middle East and Turkey and has publicly insisted on several occasions that he wants to stay at Tottenham and fight for his place.

Villa, though, believe that they are Adebayor’s preferred choice this summer and are confident of bringing him to the Midlands, even though the Togolese forward is settled in London and keen to stay in the capital.

It would provide the opportunity for Adebayor to re-unite with Tim Sherwood, who thrived under under the Villa manager's six-month spell in charge of Spurs during in the 2013-14 campaign.
    
Sherwood would ideally like to pair Adebayor up front with Christian Benteke, who remains a target for Liverpool and Manchester United, but Villa are insisting that any buyer will have to pay the £32.5m (€45m) buyout clause in his contract.

Sources have told Goal that Benteke will not leave Villa for a deal worth less than £30m (€42m) after his stunning run of form following Sherwood’s arrival at the club in February.

Spurs have been linked with Benteke but are not prepared to enter an expensive bidding war for the Belgian.