    I rolled over at the noise. The first tendrils of light were pushing into my tent
and it was already starting to get warm. Wordlessly, I threw on a top and stepped outside,
where a lanky 12-year-old named Marymut stood waiting for me with a beaming smile and a cheap
torch. I followed him along a dusty trail, past a cluster of tents, to a small shack obscured
by a fence of jumbled branches lashed together with twine.
    “Nalla Kalai Am’ma” (Good morning mother), I said. Aadya, Marymut’s mother, beamed up at
me, gesturing towards a nearby rock for me to sit on. I was plied with hot chai – India’s milky,
sugar-laden tea – as I practised my very rudimentary Tamil. Aadya smiled at me from across her
cooking fire, wisps of smoke trailing into the sky.
     This had quickly become my morning routine. I had barely been in the village for three days
before Marymut was waking me every morning for a steaming mug of chai. While the other volunteers
slept, I would spend an early morning hour chatting with Marymut and Aadya. Then I’d head into
the forest to work.
     By the end of my first week, I was spending nearly all my time with Marymut, exploring the
jungle, collecting firewood, climbing trees and playing cricket. I had never been very good at
the sport, but Marymut had me bowling like a pro in no time. We could say only a few words to
each other, but I quickly learned to understand him. I showed him how to use my Swiss army knife;
he taught me how to make bundles of kindling and lash them to my pack using vines. We’d nap in the
sun, eat samosas and play with a yellow Frisbee I’d bought from home. When I was working, he would
often spend the whole day helping: lugging rocks out the way, digging trenches and swinging the pickaxe.
In the evenings, Marymut would often take my camera, play with every conceivable configuration and
take hundreds of pictures of the sunset.
     Slowly but surely, I drifted away from my fellow volunteers. I connected far better with
the villagers, every one of whom made an impact on me. I admired their unrelenting work in the
fields, on the trenches, in the jungle. They ran themselves ragged and yet always seemed ready
to smile, to chat, to chill out. Despite the language barrier, there was something therapeutic
about being with such hard-working, yet relaxed, people.
     Marymut and Aadya in particular were incredibly kind, perhaps sensing that I missed my family
back home. They made sure I was well fed, consistently had a mug of chai in one hand, and that I felt
at ease. We couldn’t say much, but we used hand signals to chat about the day. Mundane conversations
on the difficulty of using a pickaxe turned into hilarious games of charades.
      