Manchester City make move for McCarthy after Delph snub

Manuel Pellegrini wants to sign the Everton midfielder as the club look to boost their homegrown quota but they face competition from both Arsenal and Tottenham

Manchester City are set to make a move for Everton midfielder James McCarthy following Fabian Delph’s decision to stay at Aston Villa.

City will rival Arsenal and Tottenham for the 24-year-old’s signature after he informed Everton that he is looking to leave the club this summer.

McCarthy is upset over broken promises concerning a new contract offer but Everton are desperate to keep him on Merseyside and have set a £25 million asking price.

City are admirers of McCarthy and are set to make a bid for the Republic of Ireland international as they look to boost their quota of homegrown players.

Manuel Pellegrini thought a deal was in place to sign Villa captain Delph for £8m only for the player to pull out of a move at the last minute and commit to staying at Villa Park.

McCarthy has emerged as City’s alternative signing in central midfield but they are unlikely to sign the former Wigan man for less than £20m.

Arsenal are closely monitoring McCarthy’s situation after long-term target Morgan Schneiderlin joined Manchester United from Southampton, while Tottenham are understood to be 'pushing hard’ for an agreement with Everton.

Tottenham remain slight favourites to sign McCarthy should he leave Everton, with the player wary of limited starting opportunities if he signs for City instead.

Spurs manager Mauricio Pochettino believes McCarthy would be well-suited to the club’s tactics due to his high-energy playing style.

The north Londoners also hope to use Everton’s interest in Aaron Lennon, who spent six month on loan at Goodison Park last season, to broker a deal.

McCarthy followed Everton manager Roberto Martinez to the club from Wigan in 2013 for a £13m transfer fee.

He has been one of the Toffees' key players over the last two seasons but has been upset that the club reneged on repeated promises to discuss a new contract in the last year. 

McCarthy has been particularly annoyed to see a number of team-mates, and even manager Roberto Martinez, handed new deals in that time, while new signing Tom Cleverley is on a significantly more lucrative contract.

McCarthy made 28 Premier League appearances for Everton last season and is currently with the squad for their pre-season preparations in Singapore ahead of the Asia trophy.