The Reynolds Number 
About Rowing and Flying
You may know from hard experience that having to push the rowboat through the water with any worthwhile speed is not all that easy. Since a rowboat displacees its total loaded weight in water, you have to move that water bodily aside to get the boat ahead. Water, at say 62 pounds per cubic foot, has a good bit of density. Thus it is somewhat reluctant to move aside just to let you through. Here we come up against the water's inertia, a kind of laziness. 
The Air's Viscosity
Like air, water also has viscosity or stickiness. While you are moving your rowboat through the water, the flow of the water creates skin-friction on the wetted hull-surfaces. Thus while rowing you have to overcome two different kinds of forces. There's the inertia, caused by the water's density, and the friction, caused by its stickiness. 
Let's say you are moving the boat through the water at a speed of only one mile per hour. So little water is now moving aside that most of your energy goes to overcoming the skin-friction force of the water.
Then you start rowing at a speed of ten miles per hour, the bow-and stern-waves show that you are spending most of your energy moving the water aside. You now have to overcome the inertia of the water caused by its density rather than overcome the friction caused by the water's stickiness. Thus when going slow, the ratio of friction-work to inertia-work is high. When going fast, the ratio of inertia-work to friction-work is high. 
The Air's Density
Now when you go out flying, you want your airplane to glide smoothly through the air. The air should flow over wing- and fuselage surfaces with a minimum of disturbance. While air is not nearly as dense as water, (GIVE FIGURE) it does have a certain density. Thus the air is also somewhat reluctant to move aside so your airplane can get through. Thus with your airplane as in the row boat, you also find you are up against the two important characteristics: density (inertia) and viscosity (stickiness).
