    Passengers at the rear of airplanes have had little to cheer for a long time,
and the Justice Department’s recent inquiry into allegations of collusion between
carriers to control capacity, and in that way fares, has done little to improve
relations. Still, several carriers have quietly restored or added a few creature
comforts in economy class.
    In June, United Airlines began serving free beer and wine in economy class on
transcontinental flights. The carrier is catching up with American Airlines, which
restored free drinks in transcontinental economy in 2012, and Delta Air Lines, which
did so in 2013.
    In December, the low-cost carrier Norwegian Air will introduce service from three
East Coast airports, including New York’s Kennedy Airport, to the French Caribbean
islands of Guadeloupe that will include free Wi-Fi access.
    Virgin America plans upgraded Wi-Fi service that will allow passengers to stream
video on 10 new planes that are to begin operating in September. This upgrade also
includes planes flying between San Francisco and Hawaii in November. Wi-Fi access
will be free until a rate plan is established next year.
    Service improvements reflect the industry’s newfound economic stability. “That
whole experience of being broke caused these airlines to make a lot of changes,
some of which they later concluded were smart changes and have maintained, such
as bag fees, and some they had to do to get through the day,” said Seth Kaplan,
managing partner of Airline Weekly. “Upgrading meals and drinks again recognizes
that there are things people will put up with on a two- to three-hour flight that
they don’t want to put up with on a long-haul flight.”
    Even some of the unbundled options, like food, show signs of being upgraded.
This month United introduced the chef-designed Bistro on Board menus. Dishes
include chicken chorizo scrambled eggs ($9.99) and sliced sirloin baguette
sandwich ($9.49) and are available on most flights lasting more than three
and a half hours within North America.