U.S. vs. Hackers: Still Lopsided Despite Years of Warnings and a Recent Push
WASHINGTON — In the month since a devastating computer systems breach at the Office of Personnel Management, digital Swat teams have been racing to plug the most glaring security holes in government computer networks and prevent another embarrassing theft of personal information, financial data and national security secrets.
But senior cybersecurity officials, lawmakers and technology experts said in interviews that the 30-day “cybersprint” ordered by President Obama after the attacks is little more than digital triage on federal computer networks that are cobbled together with out-of-date equipment and defended with the software equivalent of Bubble Wrap.
Katherine Archuleta, director of the Office of Personnel Management, right, at hearing before the House Oversight and Government Reform Committee last month.Hacking of Government Computers Exposed 21.5 Million PeopleJULY 9, 2015
President Obama in Washington this month. The data breach is the third major foreign intrusion into an important federal computer system in the past year. In an earlier attack,   some of the president's unclassified emails were apparently obtained by intruders.Hacking Linked to China Exposes Millions of U.S. WorkersJUNE 4, 2015
The I.R.S. building in Washington. The agency said that criminals had been able to view thousands of tax returns.Cyberattack Exposes I.R.S. Tax ReturnsMAY 26, 2015
In an effort to highlight its corrective actions, the White House will announce shortly that teams of federal employees and volunteer hackers have made progress over the last month. At some agencies, 100 percent of users are, for the first time, logging in with two-factor authentication, a basic security feature, officials said. Security holes that have lingered for years despite obvious fixes are being patched. And thousands of low-level employees and contractors with access to the nation’s most sensitive secrets have been cut off.
But officials and experts acknowledge that the computer networks of many federal agencies remain highly vulnerable to sophisticated cybercriminals, who are often sponsored by other countries. Another breach like the one in June, which exposed information on 21 million people, remains a threat — despite repeated alarms over the years that government computer systems were vulnerable to exactly that kind of attack. Asked in congressional testimony this month to grade the federal government’s cybersecurity efforts on a scale of A to F, a senior government auditor gave the government a D.
Even senior White House officials acknowledge how much remains to be done. “It’s safe to say that federal agencies are not where we want them to be across the board,” Michael Daniel, Mr. Obama’s top cybersecurity adviser, said in an interview. He said the bureaucracy needed a “mind-set shift” that would put computer security at the top of a long list of priorities. “We clearly need to be moving faster.”