UK will help US destroy IS: Cameron
Britain is committed to working with the US to destroy the "caliphate" set up by Islamic State militants in Iraq and Syria, the prime minister has said.
David Cameron told US TV network NBC he wanted the UK to do more but said he needed to "take parliament with him".
MPs voted against proposed military action in Syria two years ago.
Meanwhile, Cameron will use a speech on Monday to warn young Britons tempted to join IS they will end up as little more than "cannon fodder".
"If you are a boy, they will brainwash you, strap bombs to your body and blow you up. If you are a girl, they will enslave and abuse you," he will say.
'Standard practice'
Speaking about the UK's possible role in fighting the group, Cameron told NBC: "I want Britain to do more. I'll always have to take my parliament with me.
"We're talking and discussing at the moment, including with the opposition parties in Britain, what more we can do. But be in no doubt, we're committed to working with you to destroy the caliphate in both countries."
Last week Labour's interim leader Harriet Harman was invited to a National Security Council briefing on the threat in Syria - which was seen as a further sign of a possible parliamentary vote to extend air strikes in the autumn.
But Labour and the Lib Dems have called for an explanation in Parliament after it emerged that RAF pilots had taken part in bombing raids over Syria despite MPs having approved action against IS only in Iraq.
Downing Street has confirmed that Cameron was aware of the Syria missions flown by UK aircrew embedded with US and Canadian forces.
And Defence Secretary Michael Fallon, who encouraged MPs to consider military action in Syria earlier this month, has defended the UK involvement saying it is "standard operating practice".
'British values'
Cameron is expected to give a speech on Monday setting out the government's future strategy to combat radicalisation and extremism.
He is expected to say: "British values are our strongest weapon in the battle against the twisted narrative of Islamist extremists.
"Wherever we are from, whatever our background, whatever our religion, there are things we share together.
"We are all British. This is the home we have built together. We can all feel part of this country - and we must all now come together and stand up for our values with confidence and pride.
"And as we do so we should together challenge the ludicrous conspiracy theories of the extremists."
It follows a speech the prime minister made in June when he warned of the dangers posed by those who "quietly condone" IS militants' extremist ideology and called on Muslims to do more within their own communities.
How not to lose your smartphone
Even though you and your smartphone are inseparable, as angrily pointed out by your mother, you have the attention span of a teaspoon. If you're one of those clumsy people who are currently on their fourth phone and everyone, including you, is fed up with your losing skills, here are some useful tips to keep a closer eye on your beloved.
AVOID PURCHASING A SMARTPHONE TO BEGIN WITH.
Maybe it's for the better. You lose your phone, you cry, your parents console you in the worst way possible, you post morose statuses on Facebook, and find a little piece of yourself dying each time someone asks for your number. Maybe it's not meant to be. Maybe it's time to make do with the old Nokia 1112.
HAVE A BACK-UP PHONE.
But you can't help it! You sulk just enough to emotionally blackmail your parents, or save up teaching that student you loathe with all your heart, and get yourself a brand new phone. Make use of that old Nokia 1112 so that when you travel alone at night or go by a dodgy place, you don't have to give up your pretty device; you can offer the sacrifice instead, should you fall prey to muggers. You can return home thinking that the little beauty is safely resting inside a cozy drawer. Treasure your little precious!
CARRY YOUR PHONE, DON'T 
HOLD IT.
This one's for the ladies: take your fashion needs in one hand, open a window with the other and throw it far away beyond periphery. You won't look very fashionable with mascara running down your face when you lose your phone. Always carry a purse, whether you like it or not. While I don't support man purses, the men should put away their phones in the safety of their pockets and use them for what they were made for! Sure, it looks like a treasure chest stuffed inside your pockets but sometimes you just have to bite the bullet and do it. Besides, there are plenty of fashionable safety measures. Be innovative.
WRITE DOWN SERIAL NUMBERS.
Each smartphone comes with its unique identifying information, which includes both model and serial numbers. Write these down and store them in a safe place. You'll need this information if you ever need to report a lost or stolen phone and/or file a claim. If you can't recover your phone, report the phone's “serial number” as lost or stolen. These link your smartphone into national property databases used by the police to track stolen goods.
Now, take an oath and mark it down on the calendar: this will be your last phone. You just cannot afford to lose it at yet another wedding, where you rashly leave it on the table after your prolonged selfie-session. You're not contributing to the economy by buying a phone every other day. This. Is. It. Just give up already. You don't deserve it. 
