Since the end of the last century, when technology started to make a full impact,
debates have sprung up among people worldwide as to whether this technology
has made the world a better place to live or not. In my perspective, the new
developments have indeed improved our lives.
One striking example of how Man's new inventions have helped us to lead a
better life is the whole set of time-saving electrical appliances and tools,
ranging from washing machines to microwave ovens. No longer do we need to
go down to the river to wash our clothes on rocks or to heat our food with wood
and charcoal for never-ending hours. Nowadays, our daily chores are merely
simple tasks, needing only very little efforts on our part. It is the machines that
do all the boring and tiring work.
Consequently, we are left with much more leisure time to spend at our free will.
Technology has exerted a great influence on the ways people relax themselves
today. It has transformed our previously boring leisure time into long hours of
excitement, enjoyment and fun. For instance, nobody can deny that video,
computer and PlayStation games have added spice to our lives, especially those
of children. The home cinema, recently available on the market, has made
many happy families around the world.
Technology has not done good deeds only in those areas. It has gone even
further by improving considerably communication among countries. Owing to
new technology such as the Internet, fax and mobile phones, barriers among
nations have started to disappearing, thus turning the world into a 'global
village'. In our modern era, it is even possible to be living in a poor country
while studying with the top professors in England via the Web by enrolling in
an online degree.
We have therefore seen how technology has made the world a better place to
live in some ways. However, just as the English proverb goes, "Every coin has
two sides", technology has also had a few negative effects on our society. Thus,
the same timesaving devices that save us so much trouble have quickened so
much the pace of life. Nowadays everyone is stressed and is always
preoccupied. Moreover, overexposure to video games and the television has
been proved to be harmful to people's health, creating eye and back problems.
In addition, new technology like the Internet has allowed the brewing of new
types of crime and criminals such as hackers and viruses.
In today's world, technology is having a deep influence on the way people do
things. But the issue of whether this technology has made the world a better
place to live in will continue to be a controversial topic