MIAMI (WSVN) -- With all the news about the U.S. and Cuba officially reopening diplomatic ties, it's easy to forget how close the nations once were.

Miami was once a hotbed of diplomacy with Havana, with a Cuban consulate located right in town on North Miami Avenue. The old consulate, known as Villa Paula, is now perhaps the most haunted building in Miami. It stems back to the ghost of a one-legged Cuban woman. "People that have come to visit us from Cuba automatically say it smells like pure ... ," said Dr. Paul George of HistoryMiami. "Beautiful building. You look at the architect here and it's incredible.

In 1926, Cuban Consul Domingo Millord moved in with his wife, Paula, a young and beautiful woman from Havana. The cause of her death is still unknown, but it may have been linked to complications from a leg amputation. "It was kind of mysterious in the sense that she died so young," said George.

The Cuban government then closed its doors, and that is when the unexplainable began to occur. "The windows would slam shut, the chandeliers were falling on the ground, the apparition of this woman walking down the hallway," said George.

The owner of the building would also hear notes from an unseen piano.

Cliff Ensor, who bought the house in 1974, allegedly invited psychics to the home. One of whom believed to have pointed to five different ghosts in the building.

A Satanist was allegedly brought into the house and started choking in one of the rooms, but weird occurrences have been reported by almost anyone who has stepped inside. The current owner says twice a year flowers are mysteriously placed on a grave in the back. "There are flowers twice a year that just appear," said Villa Paula's co-owner Dominick Tubito. "We don't know where they come from or who drops them off."

David Pierce Rodriguez of PRISM, a paranormal investigator, recently went into the home now owned by Dominick Tubito, CFO of Robert M. Swedroe Architects. "Right in this area here is where both psychics, at separate times, felt a child with blood," said Rodriguez.

Psychics believed the spirit was the child of a servant.

"Somewhere over here is where they were saying that the baby is buried," said Rodriguez.

Others believe Paula Millord is in fact buried in the building's backyard. However, it is in dispute.

Despite what may have been felt and heard, some believe peace may finally be falling on the home. "Even the psychics that were with me feel a peacefulness that's in this house now," said Rodriguez.

Owners hope to turn Villa Paula will be turned into a location of Cuban art to open in October. "There's nothing else in Miami like it," said Villa Paula's co-owner Martin Siskind.