    I do pretty well on minimal sleep, and spent a great day in Knoxville. The 1:30 a.m.
bus from Knoxville to Lexington, though, tested even me. The route had started in Atlanta
and was nearly full when I (and a drunk 20-something blond guy with dreads, stinking of
cigarettes) boarded. I got about half a seat next to a friendly but corpulent woman with
pink hair, which is more than I can say for that drunk guy — no one would make space for
him, and he spent the trip passed out in the stairwell.
    We arrived in Lexington, and after taking a (probably illegal) nap behind some very
pleasant shrubs on the manicured University of Kentucky campus, I went to breakfast.
(Cinnamon rolls from Sunrise Bakery, highly recommended.)
    The trip back looked to be smoother, with just one overnight, and warmer clothes.
But pulling out of Lexington for the first leg, the bus kept jolting, causing lots of
rattling on the upper deck. “This is scary,” a small girl said. The bus driver persevered
— more than I can say for the bus, which conked out on I-75, near Conway. We were stuck
on the side of the highway for over three stuffy hours. But we got a refund for that leg,
I made my connection in Knoxville, and by early afternoon the next day I was back in New York.
    My conclusion: Megabus as a cheap way of getting from Point A to Point B is great,
if you are doing a short route or are strapped for cash. Megabus road trips as leisure
travel? That’s an off-label use prescribed for a specific type of person: the truly
flexible, comfort-be-damned, all-out budget traveler. Who has room in his bag for a
blanket and pillow. And a stomach capable of digesting a 3 a.m. blueberry-pancake Tornado.
    A year before, I had spent an eye-opening month in this Tamil Nadu jungle, volunteering
on a construction project in a tiny Indian village of just 40 people; it had no name and was
not marked on any map. I had dug trenches to lay piping, helped construct huge concrete water
tanks and connected the village to an untapped water source that was nearly 2km away. For
the first time in living memory, the villagers had access to a limitless supply of water
for their crops.
    Before arriving in this overlooked corner of southern India, I had hoped to get fit,
perhaps make friends with the other 16 volunteers and gain an insight into rural Indian life.
What I had not expected was to be adopted.
