Ashes 2015: England must bat next two days to avoid Second Test defeat to Australia
England declined to go quietly. On a sultry day and on a pitch that  remained benign, they at last  ensured Australia had to put in some hard toil, though that is of minimal comfort. The feeling persisted that the damage had already been self- inflicted, that any resistance was  futile and that this series will be tied at 1-1 some time in the next two days.
The belated and incomplete defiance was led by the captain, Alastair Cook, who batted for almost six hours, grinding out runs where he could but largely keeping the opposition at bay. Trouble was he needed to bat for about six more hours more for England to earn anything like parity.
When he departed for 96 the game seemed to be up. Cook was the second Englishman to be bowled off an inside edge, by Mitchell Marsh, the most unsung of Australia’s seam bowlers, following his admirable long-term partner, Ben Stokes. By the close of the third day of this second Investec Test the tourists, on 108-0, led by 362 runs.
The day, the third consecutively won by Australia, had its share of mild controversy which made it feel as if the series had truly begun. England were bowled out for 312, nowhere near enough, and then almost immediately compounded their felonies by shelling their third catch of the match. The progress of this summer could easily be determined by who takes the catches – think back to Brad Haddin’s dropping of Joe Root in Cardiff which cost 134 runs – and on this pitch where opportunities are so rare, their lapses have been unforgiveable.
Adam Lyth was the offender, failing to take the edge off David Warner in the gully. Warner had yet to score. By the close he was unbeaten on 60.
Somehow, England have to contrive a way to bat for most of the next two days, which in theory should be possible given the nature of the conditions but in practice looks as if it will be beyond a team that is too regularly shedding early wickets. Australia, chastened by their defeat in the opening Test in Cardiff, have significantly upped the ante here.
Having won a fairly significant toss they made it their business to bat time, aware that this was the way to accrue a mountain of runs. They had more than enough since their pace battery was assisted with alacrity by an England top order that was shockingly supine.
The time has come for the selectors to examine their options. In five of the past seven Test matches, England have lost their first three first innings wickets without going  beyond 42.
This is not designed to win many matches and both Gary Ballance and Ian Bell have signally failed to contribute enough runs. Drop one, however, and it would be difficult to make a case for keeping the other. Dropping both would be a sign that England are desperate and there is not exactly a long queue of likely candidates.
Jonny Bairstow of Yorkshire is the country’s form batsman but he does not possess the necessary virtues to bat at either three or four, the positions occupied by Ballance and Bell respectively. Tinkering with the order is a possibility but moving up Joe Root, the side’s most accomplished batsman, from five to three might be folly.
What was looking such a handsome position only a week ago after the unexpected triumph by 196 runs has now become a desperate situation. The second innings of this match is crucial. England will be set a huge target to win the match, although Michael Clarke could well tease them by making it just attainable when he declares for a second time.
Cook and Stokes detained the tourists for almost all the opening session but after the loss of so many batsmen the previous evening one session had to turn in two and possibly three. Almost but not quite. Stokes is becoming a significant international cricketer. This was his third Test innings at Lord’s this summer and 87 was his lowest score.
Quelling his natural instinct to hit the cover off the ball, he designed a mature, composed and stalwart innings. Perhaps it helped that at the other end he had a partner who embodies such qualities. Cook looked as he intended to bat all day. His bat might have been an anchor.
A quarter of an hour before lunch, Stokes received a ball from Marsh that kept slightly low and which he addressed with a bat not quite straight. It went into his stumps. Stokes knelt forlornly in his crease for a second.
Jos Buttler might have been out on nine when he edged a ball from Mitchell Johnson. Peter Nevill, the debutant wicketkeeper, swooped to his right and held the ball low to the floor. But replays showed that he had grazed the ground with it after immediately after clutching it and Buttler, much to Clarke’s  irritation, was spared.
Not for long. Soon after he pushed forward to Nathan Lyon and when Nevill held the ball Buttler turned on his heel and walked, even as the umpire, Kumara Dharmasena, was shaking his head to indicate not out. Replays showed that there might not have been enough evidence from the available technology to overturn the not out verdict. Buttler showed that he is an honourable man (Aussies please take note) but doubtless someone will have reminded him on his return to the dressing room that the only time to walk during an Ashes series is if you run out petrol.
Cook, who had been dropped on 63 when pulled ferociously to short square leg where Steve Smith was surprised by the pace of the bell, was in sight of merited century when Marsh deceived him fractionally. It all unravelled in short order after that. Only five teams in Test history have batted five sessions to earn a draw, the most recent in 1995 when Mike Atherton repelled South Africa for 11 hours in Johannesburg. It will need a reprise.
