    But those were in countries like Brazil, Mexico and Indonesia. In the
United States, the same cost-cutting mania that removed the last traces of
dignity from coach-class air travel has shorn any semblance of comfort
from our buses, as well. (Without such cost cutting, I admit that I wouldn’t
be writing this article in the first place.)
    So I should not have been surprised that my upper-deck seat to Knoxville
was barely cushioned and quite tight. Still, the bus was clean, the driver
upbeat and friendly considering the task before her, and the bathroom functional.
But an unpleasant surprise was in store for anyone who came unprepared. By which
I mean me.
    As we boarded, most passengers broke out pillows and heavy blankets and
comforters, as if we were going on an Arctic expedition. I scoffed at their
packing inefficiency. My sleeping pill occupied about one one-millionth the space.
    Then came an odd announcement. “This bus is climate-controlled,” said the driver
,suddenly sounding less hospitable, “which means we cannot control the AC or the heat.
Send your comments to megabus.com.”
    It was a pre-emptive strike against passenger mutiny, as the bus was soon frigid.
My carry-on backpack offered little help; I had packed for a bike ride in the scorching
heat. Bike shorts pulled snug over your head like a ski mask, it turns out, do not
conserve much warmth. (A Megabus spokesman confirmed that the bus driver does not
control the temperature and said that the buses are set to the same temperature as
“most federal buildings.”) I did get one welcome break from a sleepless, shivering
night — a 3:45 a.m. stop at Love’s Travel Stop, somewhere in western Virginia.
    If you’ve been to Love’s, you know what awaited me: every possibly temptation
for anyone with a sweet tooth or a penchant for late-night grease. (Count me in
for both.) A woman from the bus spotted me eyeing the two-for-$3 Tornados, greasy
meats and cheeses rolled up in crispy crusts (or in blueberry pancakes!), rotating
on rollers like 7-Eleven hot dogs under a heat lamp. Embarrassed I had been spotted
considering such a purchase, I slipped away.
    A few minutes later, after admiring the CB radios and pocketknives and an
impressive jerky selection, I went back and grabbed the plastic tongs, sliding
one pizza Tornado and one blueberry-pancake-and-sausage Tornado into the provided
sleeves.