    The nautical festival Sail Amsterdam 2015, from Aug. 19 to 23, will host 43 tall
ships, including 13 first-timers from around the world. The free event, held every
five years in the Netherlands’ capital since 1975, begins with the 7.5-mile-long
Sail-In parade, which also features four Dutch Marine vessels, marine training ships
from 11 countries, and hundreds of historic ships and replicas, all sailing in line
along the North Sea Canal from IJmuiden to Amsterdam.
    With the ships in the harbor, a host of events occur there and in several other
locations in the city, including classical and jazz concerts, demonstrations by the
Dutch Navy and a fireworks display. New this year is the Sail Music Marina, with a
stage on the northern bank of the River IJ and a lineup of pop shows. Admission onto
the ships and for many concerts is free, while visitors may buy tickets for harbor
tours, dinners and other performances and events.
     A decade ago Siem Reap was the place where you stayed, ate and grabbed a beer
or two between explorations of Cambodia’s 12th-century temple complex Angkor Wat.
Now the city that Angkor made is something of a destination itself, luring visitors
with a lively and varied dining scene, stylish hotels, genial residents and a
laid-back river town ambience. Add a growing community of Cambodian and international
artists, performers and designers reviving traditional arts and experimenting with new
means of creative expression (the Angkor Wat International Film Festival celebrated its
fourth year in February; the Angkor Photo Festival runs in December) and you’ve got an
ideal short-break city, whether or not the temples are on your agenda. (Plan on using
dollars in Siem Reap, where most prices are quoted in American currency. Small bills
come in handy for incidentals like tuk-tuk rides and bottled water.)
     For an initial, lighthearted overview of Angkor’s highlights, head just outside
town to a crazy golf tribute to Cambodia’s national treasure. Opened two years ago
by a former temple guide, Sopheap (Tee) Nheop, Angkor Wat Putt ($7 per adult includes
hotel pickup and drop-off) is a 14-hole miniature golf course anchored by nine strikingly
accurate scale models of Angkor’s major temples. Shaded by banana trees and serenaded with
American rock classics, putt your way under Preah Vihear and the Bayon temple’s iconic
stone faces to finish at Angkor Wat itself. Ring the bell at the start of each hole for
fairway drinks delivery. A hole in one (no easy task; the course has a 51 par) earns
a free beer.